Search the site
 In addition to these official meetings, an estimated 130 “side events” will be held on a range of climate change topics.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL
Climate change is considered to be one of the most serious threats to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the environment, human health, food security, economic activity, natural resources and physical infrastructure. Scientists agree that rising concentrations of anthropogenically-produced greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of climate change have already been observed, and scientific findings indicate that precautionary and prompt action is necessary.
The international political response to climate change began with the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases to avoid “dangerous anthropogenic interference” with the climate system. Controlled gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now has 189 parties. The parties to the UNFCCC typically convene annually in a COP, and twice a year in meetings of the subsidiary bodies – the SBI and SBSTA.
SBI and SBSTA together adopted 30 conclusions and one draft decision. However, most of these texts did not contain substantive agreements, and instead simply forwarded the issues to SB 25 for further consideration.
INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
MINISTERIAL “INDABA”: A meeting – or “indaba”– of ministers and senior officials from 22 countries was held at Kapama Lodge, Kruger National Park, South Africa from 17-21 June 2006, and was designed to follow on from a similar high-level dialogue held in 2005 in Greenland. Ministers discussed the upcoming Nairobi conference and longer-term action on climate change, as well as a proposal for a Multilateral Technology Acquisition Fund that could buy-out intellectual property rights and disseminate appropriate technologies. They also exchanged views on incentives to reduce emissions from deforestation and on sectoral approaches to mitigation.
G8 MEETING: The G8’s 2006 annual summit was held in St. Petersburg, the Russian Federation, from 15-17 July. The event gave prominence to energy issues, with political leaders supporting energy security and energy efficiency, while also referring to “safe and secure” nuclear power and reaffirming commitments to cut greenhouse gas emissions.
GEF COUNCIL AND ASSEMBLY: These meetings, held in Cape Town, South Africa from 28-30 August, agreed to a fourth replenishment of the Global Environment Facility of US$3.13 billion to finance environmental projects over the next four years. The Council also agreed on the governance of the climate change funds, specifying, inter alia, that decisions of the Council concerning the operations of the Adaptation Fund be taken by consensus among all Council members representing participants that are parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
SECOND GLENEAGLES MINISTERIAL DIALOGUE ON CLIMATE CHANGE, CLEAN ENERGY AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: From 3-4 October, ministers from 20 of the world’s major emitters held talks in Monterrey, Mexico, as part of a process established during the UK’s recent term as president of the G8 in 2005. The meeting considered the economic context of climate change, as well as new technologies and investment issues.
UNFCCC MEETINGS: Various UNFCCC events have been held since SB 24, including a workshop on reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries (30 August to 1 September, Rome), and several regional training workshops, CDM Executive Board sessions, meetings of the Kyoto Protocol’s Compliance Committee, and meetings of the Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee. As well, the LDC Expert Group (4-6 September, Kampala) and the Expert Group on Technology Transfer (1-3 November, Nairobi) each convened.
