Search the site
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL 
REPORT OF SB 24 AND AWG 1
AD HOC WORKING GROUP
Vice-President Sopoaga reported that consultations had been held on candidates for the AWG bureau, and proposed Michael Zammit Cutajar (Malta) as Chair and Luiz Alberto Figueiredo Machado (Brazil) as Vice-Chair. Parties elected both candidates by acclamation. Evans Njewa (Malawi) was subsequently elected as Rapporteur.
AWG Chair Zammit Cutajar said the AWG is important because it presents an opportunity for Annex I parties to demonstrate leadership and an occasion to give a signal of continuity to the carbon markets. He stressed the significance of the AWG as part of a larger process both inside and outside the UNFCCC, noting that the AWG by itself does not have the mandate to open or encourage contributions from non-Annex I parties or Protocol non-parties such as the US. Calling for a harmonious fit with other parts of the process of considering the future of the climate regime, he expressed hope that the work would proceed with momentum, motivation and ambition.
Parties adopted the agenda without amendment (FCCC/KP/AWG/2006/1). Parties began by hearing statements on the AWG’s future work, and then took up discussions in contact groups and informal consultations.
PLANNING OF FUTURE WORK
South Africa, for the G-77/China, said Annex I commitments for the second commitment period should be “substantially stricter” than the first commitment period and the task of deciding on the details and rules of the second commitment period should be completed by 2008. China stressed the AWG’s mandate to decide on new Annex I quantitative commitments and the length of the second commitment period. The EU restated its target (15-50% reductions by 2050), highlighted its Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) and said commitments must be clearly defined and fair. India called for more extensive use of the CDM, and the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) underscored historical emissions. New Zealand, Switzerland and others, opposed by the G-77/China, noted the linkages between this process and the one for Article 9. Norway stressed consideration of LULUCF issues and bunker fuels, and the Republic of Korea drew attention to the important role of technology. Canada stressed results-oriented actions and lessons learned from climate policy. Iceland highlighted sectoral benchmarking and the Russian Federation noted voluntary commitments. Japan said the second commitment period should be based on a thorough scientific analysis and should not be not a “political exercise.”
AWG Outcome: In its agreement on the planning of future work (FCCC/KP/AWG/2006/L.2/Rev.1), the AWG:
The AWG also decides to hold its second session at COP/MOP 2, considers holding an in-session workshop at AWG 2 for the presentation and exchange of relevant information, and invites submissions from Annex I parties on emission trends, mitigation potential of policies and technologies, and cost and benefits of emission reductions. In addition, it requests the Secretariat to organize this workshop, including a presentation by the IPCC, and decides that AWG will meet during the two sessional periods in 2007 and will further elaborate its work plan at AWG 2.
The AWG’s plan of future work also includes a list made by the Chair under his own initiative and responsibility on “non-exhaustive” topics that may be relevant to the further work of the AWG. These include: the scientific basis for the determination of further commitments; scenarios and risks associated with those scenarios; costs and impacts of adaptation; emission trends and socioeconomic drivers; mitigation potential of policies, measures and technologies; costs and benefits of mitigation; sectoral analyses and impacts on competitiveness; experience gained and lessons learned in implementing the Kyoto Protocol; duration of commitment periods; sectoral approach; architecture of future commitments; further incentives for technology development, deployment and transfer; and legal matters.
CLOSING SESSION
SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION
Delegates also agreed to the organization of work proposed by Chair Becker, before turning their attention to election of officers other than Chair. Given the retirement of Rapporteur Gladys Ram (Botswana) and the resignation of Heorhiy Veremiychyk (Ukraine) as Vice-Chair, József Feiler (Hungary) and Phetolo Phage David Lesolle (Botswana) were elected as Vice-Chair and Rapporteur, respectively, to serve at both SBI 24 and SBI 25.
ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS
Discussions on this item focused on reports that Annex I parties were required to submit by 2005 to demonstrate progress in achieving their emission targets. Several delegates lamented that only 18 parties had submitted their reports in time to be included in the synthesis report. The G-77/China stated that Annex I parties are failing to meet their obligations under the Protocol, while the EU, Japan and others stressed their commitment and efforts to achieving their targets.
In the SBI closing plenary, SBI Chair Becker reported on informal consultations and introduced draft SBI conclusions, which, inter alia, addressed emission trends in Annex I parties and called on them to “continue, and where appropriate intensify” their efforts to reduce or limit their emissions. The text also included a draft COP/MOP decision on forwarding the demonstrable progress reports to the facilitative branch of the compliance committee “with the aim of promoting compliance and providing for early warning of potential non-compliance.”
The Russian Federation and Ukraine, opposed by the G-77/China, proposed changing the draft conclusions so that the matter would be further considered at SB 26 instead of SB 25. Parties were unable to agree on this amendment and only adopted short, procedural SBI conclusions.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.14/Rev.1), the SBI decides to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 25.
NON-ANNEX I COMMUNICATIONS
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.12/Rev.1), the SBI, inter alia, welcomes the CGE’s progress report and notes the outcomes of two “hands-on” training workshops. The SBI also welcomes the CGE’s report on its examination of 41 initial non-Annex I national communications and urges parties and bilateral, multilateral and international organizations to take into account the recommendations contained in the document (FCCC/SBI/2006/4).
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.13), the SBI notes the importance of enhancing and maintaining capacity in non-Annex I parties, inter alia, in the area of national greenhouse gas inventories. It appreciates non-Annex I parties’ continuing compliance with UNFCCC Articles 4.1 and 12.1 (national commitments and communications), urges non-Annex I parties that have not yet done so to submit their initial national communications as soon as possible, and requests the CGE to examine such communications.
SBI Conclusions: In the conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.7), the SBI welcomes information from the GEF on its support for non-Annex I national communications and invites the GEF to continue providing such information. The SBI appreciates the technical assistance by the GEF-National Communications Support Programme of UNDP/UNEP and other organizations for the preparation of non-Annex I national communications and requests relevant organizations to submit by 4 August 2006 information on their relevant activities for consideration at SB 25.
FINANCIAL MECHANISM (CONVENTION)
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.4), the SBI: takes note of the submissions from parties (FCCC/SBI/2006/MISC.9), from intergovernmental organizations (FCCC/SBI/2006/MISC.3), and a synthesis report on the financial mechanism of the Convention prepared by the Secretariat (FCCC/SBI/2006/7); notes that it made progress in its consideration of the third review and prepared a draft text, based on a compilation of views expressed and text submitted by parties at SBI 24; and agrees to continue deliberations at SB 25 on the basis of the draft text, with a view to finalizing recommendations to COP 12.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.6), the SBI notes that SBI 24 continued to consider the draft text produced at SB 22 (FCCC/SBI/2005/10, Annex I), and the matter will continue to be deliberated at SB 25 on the basis of that text, with a view to finalizing its recommendation to COP 12 on the operation of the SCCF.
FINANCIAL MECHANISM (KYOTO PROTOCOL) 
The final issue to be resolved under this item was how to refer to those institutions from which such information would be requested. Delegates discussed several options for wording, with the G-77/China proposing wording that more directly referenced the institutions specifically included in the annex to the draft SBI conclusions (the GEF, UNDP, UNEP, the Multilateral Fund of the Montreal Protocol, and the Executive Board of the CDM), while many Annex I parties preferred language that was less specific in this regard. After a lengthy plenary discussion on wording, parties eventually agreed to reference “relevant international institutions, including, among others, those contained in the annex.” When agreeing to accept the SBI conclusions, the G-77/China said that it wanted it recorded that the “the SBI” interpreted this wording to refer to “all of the options listed…in the annex.” The EU, Norway and Switzerland then noted that since they did not agree with the word “all,” the report should not reference the “SBI.” Delegates eventually agreed that all four statements would be included in the report of the session.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.18), the SBI: takes note of submissions from parties, intergovernmental organizations, and the report of the workshop on the Adaptation Fund; notes that it made progress in its consideration of the Fund and prepared a compilation document containing possible elements for a draft decision, without prejudice to further input by parties; invites relevant international institutions, including, among others, those contained in the annex referred to above, without prejudice to any institution, to submit information on issues contained in the compilation document, taking into account views expressed by parties; requests the Secretariat to compile information submitted by institutions in a miscellaneous document for consideration at SB 25; and agrees to continue deliberating on the matter at SB 25, on the basis of the compilation document and responses provided by institutions, with a view to finalizing its recommendation on the Fund to COP/MOP 2.
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNFCCC ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9
Final Outcome: SBI took note of the information provided.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.2), the SBI expresses its appreciation of the LEG’s work. It welcomes the new work programme and requests the LEG to keep the SBI informed of its implementation. The SBI also requests the LEG to ensure that its activities are complementary to other relevant actors, including the GEF, and encourages parties to continue to provide resources to the LEG and its work programme.
Discussions focused on monitoring of capacity building activities. While the G-77/China stressed the importance of monitoring and defining its objectives, the US highlighted the need to avoid monitoring requirements that hinder implementation, Japan called for streamlining, and the EU highlighted the role of national communications and the comprehensive review of the capacity building framework. Delegates also discussed a possible synthesis report on capacity building activities, whether and when to organize an in-session workshop on monitoring and whether countries should be able to make submissions to the workshop. Failing to reach an agreement on these issues, parties adopted only procedural conclusions.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.15), the SBI states that it did not complete the consideration of this item and agrees to continue consideration at SBI 25.
The discussions focused on the capacity building needed for developing countries to participate effectively in the CDM. Several non-Annex I countries, especially African parties, underscored the unequal geographical distribution of CDM projects. Japan highlighted a workshop for CDM Designated National Authorities (DNAs) and the EU drew attention to the informal DNA Forum held recently in Bonn. Discussions also addressed a possible workshop and a synthesis report on the status of implementation of CDM projects in developing countries. Failing to reach an agreement on capacity building issues under the Protocol, parties adopted only procedural conclusions.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.16), the SBI states that it did not complete the consideration of this item and agrees to continue consideration at SBI 25.
COMPLIANCE
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.11/Rev.1), the SBI agrees to consider this issue at SBI 25 with the view to completing consideration at SBI 27. The SBI Chair will give an oral report to COP/MOP 2 based on the conclusions developed during SBI 25.
INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTION LOG
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.8), the SBI takes note of the progress report on implementation of the transaction log (FCCC/SBI/2006/INF.3). The SBI reaffirms the importance of making rapid progress in work to develop, test and make the log operational, and stressed the need for sufficient contributions to the UNFCCC Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities to support related work. The SBI also requests the Secretariat to provide written details on funding requirements, especially in relation to the development and operation of the transaction log, and to do so as soon as possible prior to SB 25.
ARRANGEMENTS FOR INTERGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS
Regarding the review of COP/MOP 1, the status of Convention parties who are not parties to the Protocol at informal Protocol consultations emerged as a point of dispute. During discussions on draft conclusions, the EU argued that informals should be closed to non-parties unless Protocol parties give their consent, while the US and Australia considered that Protocol Articles 13.2 and 15.2 establish the right of UNFCCC parties to participate. Delegates ultimately removed text on this issue, noting during the discussions that “inclusiveness” should be the aim. Another topic that was discussed briefly was a US request to move the sessional period for late 2011 so it did not coincide with Thanksgiving (a national holiday in the US). Parties agreed to this request.
The main issues to emerge under this agenda item, however, related to arrangements for COP 12 and COP/MOP 2 and the general organization of the intergovernmental process. In the contact group, it soon became apparent that many parties wanted to revise the organization of future meetings. In particular, there was broad agreement among parties that the long work hours, evening sessions, proliferation of contact groups and packed agendas that characterize the climate process should be addressed. With many speakers citing exhaustion at meetings as a concern, parties agreed not to extend the meeting dates for COP/MOP 2 and COP 12, and urged ongoing efforts to prioritize issues, streamline work, and introduce multi-sessional work programmes so that some agenda items are not addressed at every meeting. Several suggestions from the EU were accepted in this regard (FCCC/SBI/2006/MISC.8).
There were also some differences of opinion, though, with developing countries rejecting EU suggestions to “cluster” several agenda items. Also, while the Umbrella Group and the G-77/China sought strict limitations on evening meetings, the EU favored a more flexible approach. For COP 12 and COP/MOP 2, the discussions resulted in a recommendation that meetings should normally end by 6:00 pm but may, in exceptional circumstances, continue later, but not beyond 9:00 pm. In terms of general guidance for future meetings, the US and others favored applying normal working hours for meetings at UN headquarters (which are 10:00 am to 6:00 pm with a two-hour lunch break) to the climate process. The EU preferred less prescriptive text, and compromise language resulted that “encouraged,” rather than “recommended,” the holding of UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol meetings during normal UN meeting working hours “wherever possible.” Additional text proposed by the US, and supported by Australia, Norway and Japan, recommended that subsidiary bodies and workshops be scheduled “so as to minimize weekend travel wherever possible.” However, this was opposed by the EU, and was not included in the final text.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.9), the SBI finalizes details relating to COP 12 and COP/MOP 2, noting that additional investments in infrastructure will be required to accommodate these meetings. The SBI also recommends considering some issues only every second sessional period, including research, systematic observation, national communications, cooperation with relevant international organizations, and reports by UNFCCC expert groups. In addition, the SBI encourages applying normal UN headquarters working hours for meetings wherever possible.
ADMINISTRATIVE, FINANCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL MATTERS
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.3), the SBI: takes note of the status of contributions, as of 30 April 2006; expresses its appreciation to parties that have paid their contributions to the core budget in a timely manner, and particularly to parties that have made voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for Participation in the UNFCCC Process and the Trust Fund for Supplementary Activities; and urges parties that have not yet made their contributions to do so as soon as possible.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCC/SBI/2006/L.5), the SBI: takes note of the statement made by the Host Government describing progress on the accommodation of the Secretariat’s offices at the UN campus in Bonn; notes with appreciation that the Host Government has agreed to cover costs associated with the move; takes note of the statement by the Officer-in-Charge and requests him to inform the SBI of any new developments; invites the Host Government and the Executive Secretary to report to SB 26 on further progress on the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement; takes note of the amendment to the Headquarters Agreement to include the Kyoto Protocol and requests the Officer-in-Charge to proceed with the formalities necessary for entry into force of that amendment.
Discussions focused on various options for protecting individuals serving on constituted bodies under the Kyoto Protocol and expert review teams from legal action. Key issues included continuing consultations with the UN Secretary- General’s office on the application of the 1946 UN Convention on Privileges and Immunities and a possible UN General Assembly resolution; the scope of privileges and immunities necessary; and the role of the Secretariat and options for ensuring that private entities participating in CDM and JI activities do not bring legal actions against members of constituted bodies in respect to acts performed in an official capacity. In the closing plenary, Chair Watkinson explained that the complexities were legal rather than political, and that many parties needed more time to consider the constitutional implications of these issues.
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.10), the SBI, inter alia:
OTHER MATTERS
SBI Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2006/L.17/Rev.1), the SBI decides to continue consideration of this matter at SBI 25.
closING session
SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE
ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS
Parties then considered organizational matters, including the provisional agenda (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/1 and Corr.1). While the agenda was provisionally agreed, a dispute resurfaced over the agenda item relating to small island developing States (SIDS).
FIVE-YEAR PROGRAMME OF WORK ON ADAPTATION
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.17), the SBSTA welcomes the exchange of views during the Vienna workshop; requests the Secretariat to regularly update the list of organizations and institutions active in areas relevant to the five-year programme of work; and agrees to consider the activities to be undertaken for the period up to SBSTA 28 on the basis of draft text included in the annex, with a view to completing this task at SBSTA 25, and to consider and further elaborate at SBSTA 28 and thereafter additional activities and modalities of the programme of work. The annex consists of bracketed draft conclusions proposed earlier by the Chair, including possible activities under the five-year programme of work.
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.16), the SBSTA, inter alia:
The SBSTA also welcomes the technical paper on technologies for adaptation, recognizes the importance of addressing actions relating to adaptation technologies, and looks forward to the technical paper on innovative options for financing technology transfer. Finally, the SBSTA notes its interest in collaborative research and development, and requests the SBSTA Chair to hold informal consultations at SBSTA 25 to consider a set of actions for enhancing the implementation of the technology transfer framework. The conclusions include the EGTT’s recommendations as an annex.
RESEARCH AND SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATION
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.7), the SBSTA: takes note of a side event, information and views on identified research needs; invites international climate change research programmes to submit summary reports drawing on the side event, including identification of gaps; notes efforts to establish regional climate change research networks and encourages parties to support and further develop them; recognizes the importance of data exchange and encourages parties to support and strengthen systematic observation; and notes the need for enhancing two-way communication. The SBSTA also agrees to explore how to facilitate more effective dialogue between parties and regional and international climate change research programmes; and asks the Secretariat to organize an informal discussion among parties at SBSTA 26, inviting representatives of those programmes and the IPCC. Finally, the SBSTA notes that consideration should be given to holding a workshop at SBSTA 28 to facilitate in-depth exchange of views on the research needs under the Convention.
REDUCING EMISSIONS FROM DEFORESTATION IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.8), the SBSTA notes that, in their submissions, parties note the need to address emissions from deforestation in developing countries. The SBSTA also decides to continue consideration of the issue at SBSTA 25, taking into account results of the Rome workshop. The specific topics to be discussed at the workshop will include:
SBSTA further requests the Secretariat to: ensure that relevant intergovernmental organizations, NGOs and experts are invited to the workshop; prepare a background paper for the workshop with a synthesis of relevant information in national communications and the submissions; and plan for a second workshop before SB 26 in May 2007.
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES (CONVENTION)
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.10), the SBSTA welcomes the timely work of the IPCC in preparing the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and recognizes that parties will need additional time to analyze them. It decides to consider the three other LULUCF and agriculture reporting issues (noted above) at SBSTA 26 in the context of the consideration of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.
On HWP, the SBSTA: invites parties in a position to do so to report voluntarily on HWP in their national inventories consistent with current reporting guidelines; decides to discuss reporting of HWP at SBSTA 26 in the context of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines; and recognizes that there are other issues associated with HWP that need to be considered by SBSTA 26.
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.5), the SBSTA notes that consideration of this issue was not completed, and agrees to continue considering the matter at SBSTA 25.
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.13), the SBSTA inter alia: expresses its appreciation to the scientific community for its work to build on the Brazilian proposal and notes that this process remains open to strengthen participation from scientists from developing countries; notes that further work is required; encourages all interested parties, research institutions and scientists to undertake further work and continue to exchange information; notes that it expects the scientific work to be completed by the third quarter of 2007; requests the Secretariat to organize an in-session special side event at SBSTA 27, inviting invites parties’ submissions by 7 March 2008; and agrees to complete consideration of this agenda item once the scientific work is sufficiently completed, indicating that it would like to be able to do so at SBSTA 28, or shortly thereafter.
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES (PROTOCOL)
Parties agreed on the need to avoid higher global production of HCFC-22 as a result of CDM project activities, but differed on how to do so. Brazil, South Africa, Bolivia and others proposed no credits for new facilities and crediting only existing production capacity. However, some parties favored a less strict approach. Canada and China called for practical solutions based on market trends and demand. The EU and Japan called for further exploration of solutions that would provide sufficient incentives for mitigation but not for increased production. Unable to agree, parties accepted a proposal to request submissions on practical solutions and to consider the issue further at SBSTA 25.
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.15), the SBSTA notes that COP/MOP 1 recognized that issuing CERs for the destruction of HFC-23 at new HCFC-22 facilities could lead to increases in the production of HCFC-22 and/or HFC-23 and that the CDM should not lead to such increases. SBSTA calls for parties, admitted observers and relevant intergovernmental organizations to submit their views on elaborating practical solutions to address such implications by 30 July 2006, with a view to preparing draft recommendations with guidance to the CDM Executive Board for adoption by COP/MOP 2.
SBSTA Conclusions and draft COP/MOP Decision: The conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.6) recommend a draft COP/MOP decision(FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.6/Add.1), deciding that for the first commitment period, additions to and subtractions from the assigned amount of Italy resulting from forest management under Protocol Article 3.4 (after the application of paragraph 10 of the annex to decision 16/CMP.1 and resulting from forest management project activities undertaken under Protocol Article 6 on Joint Implementation), shall not exceed 2.78 Mt C/year times five.
MITIGATION
Policies and Measures
The sharing of experiences and exchange of information on policies and measures of Annex I parties was taken up at SBSTA 24 after being considered at a number of previous SBSTA sessions. At SBSTA 24, the matter was referred to informal consultations conducted by Normand Tremblay (Canada) and Hector Ginzo (Argentina). The main focus of discussions was a proposal by the EU to hold a roundtable as a means of pursuing this issue. However, Saudi Arabia, the US, and Australia expressed concerns about the proposed roundtable, with suggestions that this topic could be removed from future SBSTA agendas for four years. Further discussions resulted in a compromise whereby the issue will be taken up again at SBSTA 28 in June 2008.
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.11), the SBSTA invites parties to submit, by 1 March 2008, their views specifically on the need for further events to facilitate this exchange of information and sharing of experiences on policies and measures of Annex I parties, and requests the Secretariat to compile those views for consideration by SBSTA 28.
COOPERATION WITH RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.9) the SBSTA: welcomes the IPCC Special Report and the Technology and Economic Assessment Panel of the Montreal Protocol (TEAP) report; recalls the SBSTA 23 decision to hold an in-session workshop on non-CO2 emissions by SBSTA 27; recognizes that actions to protect the ozone layer or address climate change can have implications for both climate change mitigation and ozone layer protection; and encourages continued cooperation between the UNFCCC and Montreal Protocol Secretariats.
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.14), the SBSTA, inter alia: recognizes that cooperation at the national level, including through the national focal points, provides the greatest opportunities for efficient and effective cooperation on issues of relevance to the three Rio Conventions; notes that parties set their own priorities regarding the conventions and encourages parties in their efforts to improve and facilitate cooperation at the national level, bearing in mind the independent mandates of each Convention; and requests the Secretariat to report on the outcome of the fifteenth session of the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD-15) at SB 26.
OTHER MATTERS
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.12), the SBSTA takes note of the Secretariat’s oral report on progress in implementing training programmes for members of expert review teams participating in review activities under Protocol Article 8. The SBSTA also requests parties to nominate experts to the training programme, and asks the Secretariat to report to SBSTA 25 on progress in implementing the programme. 
SBSTA Conclusions: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.12), the SBSTA, inter alia: requests the Secretariat to continue to improve access to and regularly update greenhouse gas inventory information through the UNFCCC website; requests the Secretariat to present the data interface to parties by the end of 2006 with a view to making it fully operational before May 2007; invites parties to provide the Secretariat, by 23 February 2007, views on the data interface, on possible improvements, and on next steps; and agrees to continue this issue at SBSTA 26.
closing session
Parties adopted the report of the session (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/L.1) without amendment. Concluding the meeting, SBSTA Chair Kishan Kumarsingh thanked all participants and declared SBSTA 24 closed at 10:56 am.
A CYCLICAL PROCESS
Already, though, the AWG is helping to trigger new ideas, in spite of its limited mandate to discuss further commitments of Annex I parties. More general ideas, old and new, are now being thrown around. These include sectoral approaches, positive incentives, discussions on energy and sustainable development, and new approaches to deforestation. Some of these ideas will catch on, some will surely be discarded, but most will certainly evolve.
While the AWG managed to start planning its future work, and while environmental NGOs and developing countries stressed the need to rapidly define new targets for Annex I countries, most observers agree that nothing significant will happen until 2008-9. While the AWG is not officially linked to Protocol Article 9 (review of the Protocol), and despite the G-77/China’s insistence that there should be no linkage, many suspect that progress made on one will be dependent on progress made on the other. If this is true, given that Article 9 will only be addressed for the first time at COP/MOP 2, it was unrealistic to expect Annex I delegates to push for major breakthroughs at AWG 1. In any case, there seems little desire on the part of many parties to move ahead quickly, as many feel this period is critical to stocktaking and better understanding what has, and what has not happened leading up to the first commitment period.
Meanwhile, the SBI and SBSTA were mainly occupied with housekeeping issues. In addition to such items, little progress was reported on the Adaptation Fund and the five-year programme of work on adaptation – two key pieces of the adaptation agenda. Several delegates expressed their opinion that the slow progress had perhaps as much to do with some personality conflicts than with substantive issues. On financing, for example, the slow progress seems to be grounded in a broader debate over the GEF – although the lack of imminent deadlines obviously played its part.
BUSINESS NOT-SO-USUAL
In their interventions, business supported further commitments and clear timelines as soon as possible. Business likes certainty and stability. While some of the interest is caused by mandatory regulations, companies from both Kyoto parties and non-parties are increasingly realizing that carbon trade can be potentially very lucrative. With the start of the European Union’s Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) in 2005, there is now empirical data on actual prices of carbon emission reductions, rather than simply academic or government estimations. If the costs of carbon were lower than anticipated, the consequences could be radical. For one, business might find that the co-benefits of mitigation (such as increased efficiency) make up for the additional costs. According to some aficionados, it would be ironic, but not impossible, for business to become one of Kyoto’s strongest cheerleaders. But speculation aside, the involvement of business in climate change is real, and welcomed by parties and observers.
GROWING PAINS: CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE UNFCCC
The UNFCCC is growing in size and complexity. Proliferation of work, agenda items, and meetings was an issue throughout the meeting. The work plan for Nairobi includes COP 12, COP/MOP 1, SBI 25, SBSTA 25, AWG 2, the UNFCCC Dialogue, in-session workshops, and numerous side events. Against this tight working agenda, SBI 24’s recommendation to restrict available working hours in Nairobi and subsequent meetings is, at first glance, surprising. Justifying the decision, one delegate pointed out that, since delegates tend to fill up all available negotiating time, restricting available time would lead to greater efficiency. However, at least one seasoned analyst suspected a deliberate intention to slow down the process amongst some parties, noting that none of the major actors had an interest or the political momentum to push for rapid progress at this stage. According to one insider, the EU is busy implementing ETS and finding a common long-term position; the US is articulating its strategy on climate change; Japan, already one of the most energy-efficient economies in the world, is struggling to meet its Kyoto commitments; and the major developing countries are not ready or willing to talk about emission reductions or caps.
CYCLE OR TRANSITION?
Looking at the short-term in the UNFCCC process, the next climate change meeting in Nairobi could be simply a procedural exercise or, if time constraints prove too disruptive, a ï¿½messy affair.ï¿½ But, stepping back to view the wider picture of actions to address climate change, the situation looks more upbeat. For both the UNFCCC process and the outside world, a new act seems to have begun.
UPCOMING MEETINGS
