 Earth Negotiations Bulletin
Vol. 12 No. 82 
Tuesday, June 09 1998
HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE MEETINGS OF THE FCCC SUBSIDIARY BODIES 
8 JUNE 1998 
The Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) met to discuss arrangements for
intergovernmental meetings, adverse impacts, national communications and NGO involvement.
A joint SBI/SBSTA meeting convened in the afternoon to hear and discuss a report from the
cooperative mechanisms contact group. The Ad Hoc Group on Article 13 (AG13) continued
discussions on the Multilateral Consultative Process (MCP) in morning and afternoon
sessions. 
SBI/SBSTA JOINT SESSION 
A joint SBI/SBSTA session considered work on cooperative mechanisms. Contact group
Co-Chair Ivo de Boer (Netherlands) reported that the group had met three times to:
identify issues related to the mechanisms; consider a work programme; and suggest
decisions. The group mandated a Co-Chairs' paper, submitted as a proposed schedule of
work. 
The G-77/CHINA, supported by the PHILIPPINES, SAUDI ARABIA and CHINA, called upon SBSTA
to clarify methodological issues before substantive issues are discussed. He also: noted,
with CHINA, the G-77/CHINA's current consideration of this item; called for consideration
of rules, guidelines and modalities and other relevant issues; and, with the PHILIPPINES,
opposed establishing another contact group on similar issues. The Chair stated that the
two groups' work should be harmonized. 
The EU introduced a proposal on international emissions trading, noting differences to
the Canadian proposal in addressing: supplementarity; environmental effectiveness,
compliance mechanisms, market transparency, risk and liability rules, reporting
requirements, and eligibility. 
SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR IMPLEMENTATION 
Regarding a call for Annex I Parties to submit information on potential impacts of
policies and measures (P&Ms), he suggested that those whose own interests are at stake
are better situated to identify impacts. In the absence of examples, he said it was
premature to consider establishing a new subsidiary body. He said the possible impacts of
response measures would be best raised individually by affected Parties. There could be no
compensation for alleged adverse affects from implementation of Article 4 commitments. On
adverse effects of climate change, and supported by CANADA and AUSTRALIA, he advocated
starting with each Party's own assessment of its vulnerability in initial national
communications. CANADA undertook to provide adaptation technology through the CDM.
AUSTRALIA favored more work on the Secretariat's proposed analytical framework and
anticipated working through the CDM. SAUDI ARABIA said complexity in other issues areas
had not been given as a reason for deferring work. He expressed surprise at innovative
interpretations of Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and the Protocol provisions. NORWAY supported
CANADA and AUSTRALIA and underlined the importance of cost effective implementation.
ZIMBABWE clarified that the G-77's proposal calls for an ad hoc working group to meet
during the COP. 
CHINA called for action on funding and technology transfer, noting these are not to be
limited to the CDM. Responding to a US request for clarification on contradictions in
P&Ms, SAUDI ARABIA, supported by VENEZUELA, noted GHG-intensive energy subsidies and
taxes, and commitments to reduce petroleum use alongside increasing domestic production.
GEORGIA noted the readiness of many non-Annex I countries to take on voluntary commitments
on GHGs, with adequate support under Article 4 within the framework of CDM. A contact
group Co-Chaired by Tibor Farag (Hungary) and Salamat Mohmad Salamat (Iran) will discuss
the G-77/China's draft decision. 
The SBI considered a draft conclusion on national communications from Annex I Parties
(FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.2). An EU proposal for a draft COP-4 decision on revised guidelines was
not supported. A SWISS proposal not to limit submission of Parties' views to "the
scheduling of" subsequent communications was accepted. 
On a draft conclusion on involvement of NGOs (FCCC/SBI/1998/CRP.3), the US, supported
by SAUDI ARABIA and VENEZUELA, the EU, and CHINA, deleted a request for additional
information on the objectives of NGOs. The EU supported existing arrangements accrediting
three NGO constituencies. SAUDI ARABIA, supported by CHINA and VENEZUELA, proposed that
"Parties" rather than "Chairmen" agree on NGO participation in
informal contact groups. Delegates accepted a US compromise allowing participation unless
the group objects. 
AD HOC GROUP ON ARTICLE 13 
AG13 continued deliberating Paragraph 13 (outcome), specifically questions on the
reporting of the Committee, access to the reports of the work of the Committee, and
whether reports should be subject to consent of Parties concerned. 
On paragraph 14 (evolution), delegates accepted text noting that these terms of
reference may be amended by the Conference of the Parties. The Chair proposed that
unresolved problems should be resolved in a drafting group. 
CANADA, Chair of the drafting group, reported that Parties had agreed the MCP can be
triggered by: a Party with respect to its own implementation; a group of Parties with
respect to their own implementation; a Party or group of Parties with respect to
implementation by another Party or group of Parties; and/or the Conference of Parties. On
paragraph 13 (outcome), language was included that allows for concerned Parties' comments
on the conclusions and recommendations to be forwarded with the report to the COP. The
group agreed to defer decisions on the size and representation of the Committee to the
final AG13 sessions, to allow further consultations. At the end of the session the
delegates received a revised draft text. 
IN THE CORRIDORS 
Industry lobbyists are looking for clearer indications from the Parties as to their
expected role under Article 17 on emissions trading. Some have pointed out that, until
now, the private sector's role has been assumed but far from assured. The spectrum of
interests and positions within the industry lobby converge around the general concern that
maximum flexibility be built into the flexibility mechanisms so that the free market can
"get on with it." "There's the Protocol and there's real life,"
commented one observer on the key role of the markets. There is some skepticism about the
level of capping flagged by the EU. 
IN THE CORRIDORS II 
Some delegates voiced concern about the contact groups' progress or the lack thereof.
On flexibility mechanisms, details from developing country delegates on a G-77/China
position were sparse and frequently far from optimistic. Some were dismayed that emissions
trading discussions are overshadowing those on the CDM. Others feared that discussions on
the CDM would not address all developing countries equally. Still others cautioned that
contact groups designated last week have not yet met, while new groups may proliferate. 
THINGS TO LOOK FOR 
SBI: SBI will meet at 12:00 am in the Maritim Room. 
AG13: AG13 will meet at 10:00 am in the Beethoven Room. 
Article 6 Workshop : This group will meet at 1:00 pm in the Haydn Room. 
Reception: Launch of "Rising Voices Against Global Warming", a book by Azza
Taalab, with keynote speaker, Michael Zammit-Cutajar, at from 6:30-8:30 pm in the Maritim
Piano Bar. 

This page was uploaded on 06/09/9818 Jan 2002 17:06:30 -0600
