Search the site
The Paris Climate Change Conference convened from 29 November to 13 December 2015, in Paris, France. It included the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 21) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the 11th session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (CMP 11). Three subsidiary bodies (SBs) also met, the 43rd sessions of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA 43) and the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI 43), and the 12th part of the second session of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action (ADP 2-12).
The Paris Climate Change Conference brought together over 36,000 participants, nearly 23,100 government officials, 9,400 representatives from UN bodies and agencies, intergovernmental organizations and civil society organizations, and 3,700 members of the media.
Focus in Paris centered on advancing negotiations on the Paris Outcome, including a legally-binding agreement and associated decisions, to fulfill the mandate outlined in Durban, South Africa, at COP 17, for the ADP “to develop a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all Parties” to be adopted at COP 21. The ADP opened a day early, on Sunday, 29 November, in order to launch technical negotiations.
A leaders event, which brought together over 150 Heads of State and Government, was held on Monday, 30 November, to generate political will towards an agreement. During the first week, work concentrated under the ADP, which launched a contact group to consider crosscutting issues and items not associated with agreement articles, and established spin-off groups to work on the text of individual articles in the draft agreement text and their associated decision text, as well as decision text on pre-2020 ambition. 
Following the closure of the ADP on Saturday, 5 December, and the transmission of the ADP’s outcome to the COP, the Comité de Paris was established under the COP 21 Presidency to continue work on the draft agreement and decision text. Minister-led indabas, bilaterals and other consultations took place under the Comité de Paris from Sunday through Saturday, 6-12 December. Following intensive consultations by the COP 21 Presidency on Thursday and Friday, 10-11 December, the Comité de Paris convened briefly on Saturday morning, 12 December, for the presentation of the final text. After consultations by groups of parties, the Comité de Paris reconvened in the evening to forward the final text of the Paris Agreement and associated decision to COP 21. At 7:29 pm, COP 21 adopted the Paris Agreement and the associated decision.
Parties also adopted 34 decisions, 23 under the COP and 12 under the CMP, that, inter alia: adopt the Paris Agreement; enhance technology development and transfer through the Technology Mechanism; decide on the process to assess progress made in the process to formulate and implement national adaptation plans (NAPs); extend the mandate of the Least Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG); adopt the terms of reference for the third comprehensive review of the implementation of the capacity-building framework; address methodological issues under the Kyoto Protocol, including clarification of the Section G, Article 7.3ter of the Doha Amendment; provide methodological guidance for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing countries, and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (REDD+); provide guidance to the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI); and approve the programme budget for the UNFCCC for the biennium 2016-2017.
The international political response to climate change began with the 1992 adoption of the UNFCCC, which sets out a legal framework for stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs) to avoid “dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.” The Convention, which entered into force on 21 March 1994, has 196 parties. In December 1997, delegates to COP 3 in Kyoto, Japan, agreed to a protocol to the UNFCCC that committed industrialized countries and countries in transition to a market economy to achieve emissions reduction targets. These countries, known as Annex I parties under the UNFCCC, agreed to reduce their overall emissions of six GHGs by an average of 5% below 1990 levels in 2008-2012 (the first commitment period), with specific targets varying from country to country. The Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February 2005 and now has 192 parties.
LONG-TERM NEGOTIATIONS, 2005-2009: Convening in Montreal, Canada, in 2005, the first session of the CMP established the Ad Hoc Working Group on Annex I Parties’ Further Commitments under the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP) in accordance with Protocol Article 3.9, which mandated consideration of Annex I parties’ further commitments at least seven years before the end of the first commitment period.
In December 2007, COP 13 and CMP 3 in Bali, Indonesia, resulted in agreement on the Bali Roadmap on long-term issues. COP 13 adopted the Bali Action Plan (BAP) and established the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long-term Cooperative Action under the Convention (AWG-LCA), with a mandate to focus on mitigation, adaptation, finance, technology, capacity building and a shared vision for long-term cooperative action. Negotiations on Annex I parties’ further commitments continued under the AWG-KP. The deadline for concluding the two-track negotiations was 2009 in Copenhagen.
COPENHAGEN: The UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, Denmark, took place in December 2009. The high-profile event was marked by disputes over transparency and process. Late in the evening of 18 December, these talks resulted in a political agreement, the “Copenhagen Accord,” which was then presented to the COP plenary for adoption. After 13 hours of debate, delegates ultimately agreed to “take note” of the Copenhagen Accord, and to extend the mandates of the negotiating groups until COP 16 and CMP 6 in 2010. In 2010, over 140 countries indicated support for the Accord. More than 80 countries also provided information on their national mitigation targets or actions.
CANCUN: The UN Climate Change Conference in Cancun, Mexico, took place in December 2010, where parties adopted the Cancun Agreements and extended the mandates of the two AWGs for another year. Parties agreed to consider the adequacy of the global long-term goal during a 2013-2015 review. The Cancun Agreements also established several new institutions and processes, including the Cancun Adaptation Framework, the Adaptation Committee and the Technology Mechanism, which includes the Technology Executive Committee (TEC) and the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN). The Green Climate Fund (GCF) was created and designated as an operating entity of the Convention’s financial mechanism.
DURBAN: The UN Climate Change Conference in Durban, South Africa, took place in November and December 2011. The Durban outcomes covered a wide range of topics, notably a decision on long-term cooperative action under the Convention and agreement on the operationalization of the GCF. Parties also agreed to launch the ADP with a mandate “to develop a protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all Parties.” The ADP is scheduled to complete these negotiations no later than 2015, with the new instrument entering into force in 2020. In addition, the ADP was mandated to explore actions to close the pre-2020 ambition gap in relation to the below 2°C target.
DOHA: The UN Climate Change Conference in Doha, Qatar, took place in November and December 2012. The conference resulted in a package of decisions, referred to as the “Doha Climate Gateway.” These included amendments to the Kyoto Protocol to establish its second commitment period (2013-2020) and agreement to terminate the AWG-KP’s work. Parties also agreed to terminate negotiations under the BAP, including the AWG-LCA.
WARSAW: The UN Climate Change Conference in Warsaw, Poland, took place in November 2013. The meeting adopted an ADP decision that, inter alia, invites parties to initiate or intensify domestic preparations for their intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs). Parties also adopted a decision establishing the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts (WIM), and the Warsaw Framework for REDD+.
LIMA: The UN Climate Change Conference in Lima, Peru, took place in December 2014. Negotiations in Lima focused on outcomes under the ADP necessary to advance toward an agreement at COP 21 in Paris in 2015. Following lengthy negotiations, COP 20 adopted the “Lima Call for Climate Action” (Decision 1/CP.20), which sets in motion the negotiations towards a 2015 agreement, including the process for submitting and reviewing INDCs. The decision also addresses enhancing pre-2020 ambition. Parties also adopted 19 decisions, 17 under the COP and two under the CMP that, inter alia: help operationalize the WIM; establish the Lima work programme on gender; and adopt the Lima Ministerial Declaration on Education and Awareness-raising.
The Lima Conference was able to lay the groundwork for Paris by capturing progress made in elaborating the elements of a draft negotiating text for the 2015 agreement and adopting a decision on INDCs, including their scope, upfront information, and steps to be taken by the Secretariat after their submission.
ADP 2-8: ADP 2-8 took place in February 2015, in Geneva, Switzerland. The objective of the session, as mandated by COP 20, was to develop the negotiating text based on the elements for a draft negotiating text annexed to Decision 1/CP.20. The Geneva negotiating text adopted at ADP 2-8 served as the basis for the negotiations of the 2015 agreement.
ADP 2-9: ADP 2-9 convened in June 2015 in Bonn, Germany, and undertook streamlining and consolidation, clustering and conceptual discussions of the Geneva negotiating text, including on: preamble; general/objective; mitigation; adaptation and loss and damage; finance; technology development and transfer; capacity building; transparency; timeframes; implementation and compliance; and procedural and institutional provisions. The ADP also discussed workstream 2 (pre-2020 ambition), in particular its mandate, and proposed elements that could comprise a decision on workstream 2.
ADP 2-10: ADP 2-10 convened in August-September 2015, in Bonn, Germany. To guide the work, the ADP Co-Chairs produced, at the request of parties, a “Tool” based on the streamlined and consolidated text resulting from ADP 2-9. Delegates engaged on various parts of the Tool in facilitated groups and “spin-offs,” or informal meetings of the facilitated groups. The groups considered placement of paragraphs in the Tool, engaged in conceptual discussions on key issues, and, in some cases, started developing textual proposals. The ADP Co-Chairs were mandated to produce a revised non-paper to serve as the basis for further negotiations.
ADP 2-11: ADP 2-11 convened in October 2015, in Bonn, Germany. The ADP Co-Chairs opened the session proposing to begin text-based negotiations on the basis of the text they prepared, including the non-papers (ADP.2015.8.InformalNote and ADP.2015.9.InformalNote) with draft agreement and decision text under workstream 1, and draft decision text under workstream 2. After meeting in a contact group to reinsert “must-haves” into the non-paper text on workstream 1, parties convened in spin-off groups to advance negotiations on specific sections in the agreement and decision text, and in an open-ended contact group to take stock of progress and discuss issues not addressed in spin-off groups.
Parties agreed to forward the revised non-paper, dated 23 October at 23:30, which captured the work undertaken by parties at ADP 2-11, to serve as the basis for further negotiations under the ADP. Parties also requested that the Secretariat prepare a technical paper, which would identify closely related paragraphs and duplication within sections, and possible areas for streamlining, without making any changes to the content of the text.
On Monday, 30 November, observing that we are in a “spectacular year,” COP 20/CMP 10 President Manuel Pulgar-Vidal, Minister of Environment, Peru, underscored that fulfilling the Durban mandate for a universal, legally-binding agreement will help frame sustainable development for the next generation.
Parties then elected Laurent Fabius, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Development, France, as COP 21/CMP 11 President by acclamation. COP 21/CMP 11 President Fabius outlined the role of the French presidency as: listening to all views; ensuring transparency and inclusiveness; seeking an ambitious agreement; ensuring compromise among parties; and leaving only “final points” for consideration by ministers during the second week.
UNFCCC Executive Secretary Christiana Figueres emphasized the parties’ responsibility to finalize an agreement that “enables the achievement of national climate change goals, delivers necessary support for the developing world, and catalyzes increasing action by all.”
Echoing Figueres’ assertion that “never before has a responsibility so great been in the hands of so few,” His Royal Highness Charles, the Prince of Wales, called on delegates “in pursuing national interest, not to lose sight of international necessity.”
This report summarizes how the Paris Agreement and its associated decision were reached, under the “Paris Agreement,” which includes discussions on the ADP, the COP and the Comité de Paris. This report also summarizes the discussions by the COP, CMP, SBI and SBSTA.
On Monday, 30 November, President François Hollande, France, opened the leaders event, which brought together over 150 Heads of State and Government, and said the Paris outcome would be successful if it: determines a credible path to limit temperature rise below 2°C, or 1.5°C if possible; responds to climate change with solidarity so that no state can abstain from its commitments; and mobilizes all societies and sectors to act.
Stressing that leaders convening in Paris had the moral and political responsibility to show leadership, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that the Paris agreement must be: durable; dynamic; balance between the leading role of developed countries and growing responsibilities of developing countries according to their resources and level of development; and credible, with the current level of ambition “as the floor.”
On Monday, 7 December, COP 21/CMP 11 President Laurent Fabius opened the joint high-level segment, entreating ministers that the “time for decisions has come.” UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called Paris the “opportunity to define destiny.”
UN General Assembly President Mogens Lykketoft underlined that the Paris meeting needed to deliver a political agreement with equity and ambition at its core. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Chair Hoesung Lee said that science has outlined the problem and is providing solutions.
UNFCCC Executive Secretary Christiana Figueres called on ministers to exercise political leadership to craft an agreement that meets national and local needs, lives up to scientific integrity, safeguards the vulnerable and promotes sustainable prosperity for all.
During the first week of the Paris Climate Change Conference, negotiations on the Paris Agreement, and the associated decision, took place under the ADP. Following transmission of the outcome of the ADP to COP 21 on Saturday, 5 December, the Comité de Paris, an open-ended body, was established by the COP to move negotiations forward. Negotiations during the second week took place under the Comité de Paris, including in the open-ended Comité, in informal ministerial indabas, informal consultations, and bilaterals.
ADP 2-12 
On Sunday, 29 November, ADP Co-Chair Ahmed Djoghlaf (Algeria) opened ADP 2-12. COP 20/CMP 10 President Manuel Pulgar-Vidal called on delegates to show solidarity and work efficiently in a time-bound manner to find textual solutions. Incoming COP 21/CMP 11 President Laurent Fabius called on delegates to build compromises.
ADP Co-Chair Daniel Reifsnyder (US) highlighted informal notes on workstream 1 (the 2015 Agreement) and workstream 2 (pre-2020 ambition) (ADP.2015.10-11.InformalNote), and a technical paper produced by the Secretariat identifying closely related concepts, duplications and areas for streamlining (ADP.2015.12.InformalNote). Outlining the mode of work, he said the open-ended contact group would review progress made by spin-off groups and allow for coherence on cross cutting issues. He said that spin-off groups would address: preamble and purpose/general (draft Article 2 and 2bis), co-facilitated by George Wamukoya (Kenya) and Diann Black-Layne (Antigua and Barbuda); mitigation (draft Article 3, 3bis and 3ter), co-facilitated by Franz Perrez (Switzerland) and Fook Seng Kwok (Singapore); adaptation, and loss and damage (draft Articles 4 and 5) co-facilitated by Andrea Guerrero (Colombia) and Georg Børsting (Norway);finance (draft Article 6), co-facilitated by Georg Børsting (Norway) and Diann Black-Layne (Antigua and Barbuda); technology development and transfer (draft Article 7), co-facilitated by Tosi Mpanu-Mpanu (Democratic Republic of Congo) and Artur Runge-Metzger (EU); capacity building (draft Article 8), co-facilitated by Artur Runge-Metzger (EU) and Tosi Mpanu-Mpanu (Democratic Republic of Congo); transparency (draft Article 9), co-facilitated by Fook Seng Kwok (Singapore) and Franz Perrez (Switzerland); global stocktake (draft Article 10), co-facilitated by Roberto Dondisch (Mexico) and George Wamukoya (Kenya); implementation and compliance, and final clauses (draft Article 11 and Articles 12-26), co-facilitated by Sarah Baashan (Saudi Arabia) and Aya Yoshida (Japan); and workstream 2, co-facilitated by Aya Yoshida (Japan) and George Wamukoya (Kenya).
Parties agreed that the informal notes issued on 6 and 10 November (ADP.2015.10-12.InformalNote) would form the basis for negotiations, with the exception of discussions on finance, which would be based on the 23 October text, which was issued at the close of ADP 2-11. ADP Co-Chair Djoghlaf said a consolidated new draft would be prepared by Friday, 4 December, and the outcome of the ADP would be forwarded to the COP for its consideration on Saturday, 5 December.
CONTACT GROUP: The ADP contact group first convened on Tuesday, 1 December, and daily throughout the first week. Each meeting of the contact group began with reports back from the co-facilitators of the spin-off groups. Matters not assigned to specific spin-off groups were discussed in the contact group, including both decision and agreement text. A compilation text capturing progress made in the ADP on the draft agreement and decision text was published on Thursday morning 3 December.
During the Thursday evening contact group, ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder proposed concluding the work of the spin-off groups. Parties agreed that the ADP Co-Chairs would produce an updated, clean and streamlined text, with clear options, developed in consultation with spin-off group co-facilitators. They agreed that bridging proposals developed by the spin-off group co-facilitators would be kept in a separate document, and that spin-off groups be used when necessary to reach agreement.
On Friday morning, 4 December, ADP Co-Chair Ahmed Djoghlaf invited comments on two documents, a revised draft agreement and decision text on workstreams 1 and 2, “the compilation text,” and a document containing the work of the ADP contact group incorporating bridging proposals by the co-facilitators, “the compilation text with bridging proposals.” Parties agreed to negotiate on the basis of the compilation text with bridging proposals, indicated key elements of concerns and requested that a reflection note from the ADP Co-Chairs capturing parties’ comments be provided alongside the compilation text with bridging proposals. These documents were then presented to and adopted by the ADP on Saturday, 5 December, and subsequently forwarded to the COP.
Decision Paragraphs Not Related to Specific Articles in the Draft Agreement: During substantive negotiations, discussions in the contact group on these issues centered around the adoption of the agreement and took place throughout the week.
Parties converged on provisionally applying the agreement pending entry into force, as well as on a body to prepare for entry into force, including using the ADP under a new name or mandate, with its operational arrangements.
Parties agreed to use an existing body, specifically the ADP under a new name, by “importing” its governance arrangements, particularly regarding the Bureau as proposed by Colombia, on behalf of the Independent Alliance of Latin America and the Caribbean (AILAC). Parties emphasized the need to convey that the ADP’s mandate was completed successfully. ADP Co-Chair Djoghlaf presented a proposal to rename the ADP as the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Outcome, and that the working group: prepare for the entry into force of the agreement and convene the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Agreement (CMA); oversee implementation of the work programme resulting from relevant requests in the decision; report to the COP; and hold its first session in 2016.
Tuvalu, supported by Saudi Arabia, AILAC and others, suggested adding a new paragraph, after clarifying that the ADP has finished its mandate, which decides to establish the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Paris Outcome. The US, China, Saudi Arabia, Iran and others asked for more clarity on the working modalities, particularly chairing arrangements.
Views diverged on support for the communication of INDCs, their communication itself and noting the gap between the aggregate effect of the INDCs and emissions consistent with the 2°C or 1.5°C limit as well as information on the fairness and ambition of INDCs communicated by parties.
On a paragraph on updating the synthesis report on the aggregate effect of INDCs, parties engaged in a long discussion on text requesting the Secretariat to “provide information on the fairness and ambition of the INDCs communicated by parties.” Malaysia for the Like-Minded Developing Countries (LMDCs), India, Saudi Arabia for the Arab Group, and the Russian Federation, among others, called for deleting the text. Others made alternative proposals, with Tuvalu suggesting “information on how parties have reported on fairness and ambition.”
In a subsequent contact group meeting, ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder presented a revised proposal containing paragraphs on: taking note of the synthesis report on the aggregate effect of INDCs; noting the ambition gap; and noting expressed adaptation needs. Parties also considered an amended draft decision paragraph on updating the synthesis report.
Saint Lucia, supported by a number of parties, and opposed by the Arab Group, introduced a new paragraph urging the update to the synthesis report to take into account 1.5°C scenarios.
Parties also debated decision text on: giving effect to the agreement, specifically efforts by various actors; administrative and budgetary matters; a facilitative dialogue; and a request to the IPCC for a special report.
On the role of various actors, the Co-Chairs proposed replacing references to local communities and indigenous peoples in the paragraph on welcoming the efforts of all actors to address climate change with a new paragraph recognizing the knowledge, technologies and efforts made by local communities and indigenous peoples. Bolivia opposed juxtaposing local communities and indigenous peoples with the private sector.
The Arab Group proposed deleting paragraphs that request all actors to scale up and demonstrate efforts, cautioning against passing the burden to actors outside the Convention, and expressed concern about the legal implications of “inviting” non-state actors’ activities that may then cause environmental, social or other harm. With the clarification that parties “welcome,” rather than “invite,” all actors to scale up and demonstrate efforts, parties removed the brackets around these paragraphs.
On a paragraph requesting the IPCC to provide a special report on the impact of a temperature increase of 1.5°C, Saudi Arabia and others questioned its “added value” beyond the IPCC assessment reports. Tuvalu noted that newer information may be available that was not considered during the last assessment report cycle. India and China underscored the need for information on how to achieve temperature goals. Several parties requested, and ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder agreed, to consult with the IPCC.
General and Cross-Cutting Issues: The contact group took up issues of relevance to the agreement as a whole at various points during the week.
On the title of the draft agreement, the Russian Federation, opposed by China, recommended deleting the option of “implementing agreement.”
On differentiation, all parties agreed that the new agreement should reflect differentiation. Several parties observed the need to recognize the special circumstances of small island developing states (SIDS) and least developed countries (LDCs), with Saudi Arabia noting that this is already in the Convention.
Sudan, for the African Group, proposed a formula for inscribing differentiation in the relevant sections: state the level of obligation or precision for developed and developing countries; provide flexibility for developing countries, such as “all countries willing to do so,” which Tuvalu, for the LDCs, supported; and provide further flexibility for African countries, LDCs and SIDS. China and India opposed phrases such as “willing to do so.”
Saying the world has not changed, Malaysia, for the LMDCs, underlined that historical responsibility lies with developed countries. He underscored that developed countries have yet to meet their Convention or Protocol obligations regarding mitigation and means of implementation (MOI), which the EU and Australia disputed in their cases.  
Preamble and Purpose/General (draft Articles 2 and 2bis) and Associated Decision Text: The preamble and purpose/general (draft Articles 2 and 2bis) were discussed on Monday, 30 November, and Thursday, 3 December, in spin-off groups. Informal consultations were held on Tuesday-Thursday, 1-3 December.
In the spin-off group, parties were divided on preamble paragraphs regarding, inter alia: vulnerability; historical emissions; human rights; food security; land use; forestry; sinks and reservoirs; and carbon pricing. Many pointed to one or more terms or concepts that fall outside the Convention, or are not internationally “agreed” or defined. Several countries called for deleting “in light of different national circumstances” in a paragraph on the pursuit of the Convention’s objective. Many developing countries called for references to vulnerability and special circumstances.
Two parties, opposed by two others, requested that language on response measures be bracketed in a paragraph on the intrinsic relationship between climate change, poverty eradication and sustainable development. Parties also disagreed on the clarity of the phrase “harmony with nature,” on the term “best available science,” and on the accuracy of a paragraph on historical and per capita emissions.
In the ADP text that was forwarded to the COP, brackets remained around the paragraphs on historical emissions and evolving economic and emission trends. In addition, phrases on people under occupation in the paragraph on human rights and REDD+ and joint mitigation and adaptation approach in the paragraph on sinks and reservoirs remained bracketed.
On general (Article 2), one developed country party noted the science is not in dispute and brackets should be removed from “on the basis of science.” Two other developed country parties stressed the importance of a “no text” option for this article. Parties were divided on whether to see climate change in isolation, or as intertwined with economic and social issues, human rights, gender equality, and rights of indigenous peoples and local communities, among others. Some suggested these issues could be addressed in the preamble. Parties also differed on whether the agreement should “enhance implementation” or “further the objective” of the Convention. One group of parties, opposed by another, strongly supported the inclusion of a 1.5°C warming limit. One party, opposed by another, suggested replacing “transformation” with “tractable shift” in a paragraph referencing sustainable development. Another suggested “pathways” to sustainable development.
In the ADP text that was forwarded to the COP, most of the text remained bracketed, with particular disagreement on the long-term temperature goal and mention of response measures, loss and damage, and the rights of people under occupation. In addition, two options remained for enhancing implementation or achieving the objective of the Convention.
On purpose (draft Article 2bis), one group of parties, opposed by several parties, stressed that this article was needed as a crosscutting article to ensure all elements in the agreement, including transparency of action and support, are treated with parity in terms of differentiation. Another said the article might be a prudent way to determine differentiation without having to address it separately in every element of the agreement. Three parties opposed, saying that the article undermines the nuances of what is being negotiated in other parts of the agreement. Several parties noted that the language would have to be improved upon to make clear linkages with the rest of the agreement. One party asked that both paragraphs in the article be bracketed, noting the legal implications must be clear. A group of parties explained that the article was not intended to be a legal obligation but rather to guide the legal obligations in the rest of the agreement. In the ADP text that was forwarded to the COP, the entire text, and many terms and phrases within the text, remained bracketed.
On Friday, 4 December, the ADP contact group also took up these parts of the text briefly. On preambular paragraphs on special needs, El Salvador requested adding “and the Central American isthmus,” and the African Group called exclusion of African countries “a red line.” Kyrgyzstan asked to include the vulnerability of mountain areas.
On purpose (draft Article 2), Venezuela opposed language on sustainable development, saying it “belongs to a different agenda” and goes beyond low GHG emissions and climate resilience. She supported “stabilization” of GHG emissions, and, with Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, opposed the inclusion of “decarbonization” and “carbon neutrality.” Bolivia called for the reinsertion of language on protecting the environmental integrity of Mother Earth. The US reiterated that purpose should be reflected in the respective parts of the agreement, preferring no text for this article.
Mitigation (draft Articles 3, 3bis and 3ter) and Associated Decision Text: On mitigation, parties discussed, inter alia, features, support and timing of contributions, and non-market mechanisms.
On Tuesday, 1 December, spin-off group Co-Facilitator Perrez reported from bilateral consultations that no landing zone existed yet on information, housing and long-term strategies. Parties agreed to replace agreement text on the long-term goal with text developed in informal consultations under the spin-off group.
On Wednesday, 2 December, the spin-off group heard reports from facilitators of party-led informal discussions, which reflected some progress in identifying clearer options in the draft agreement. The group observed that parties’ views continued to differ on, inter alia: support; differentiation; and accounting. Co-Facilitator Perrez also reported back from consultations, noting, inter alia, work by two parties on a textual proposal on response measures. India indicated interest in further consultations on unilateral measures. Brazil emphasized the importance of the concept of “developed country parties taking the lead.”
On Thursday, 3 December, parties reviewed a new compilation text, and new agreement and decision text proposals prepared by the co-facilitator and two party facilitators that sought to capture existing options on: accounting, and methods and guidance; cooperative approaches; and a mechanism to support sustainable development. On the compilation text, parties briefly discussed the treatment of support in the agreement article and agreed to an amended footnote that states that “this is a placeholder until decided where support should be dealt with.” On the text proposals on accounting, and methods and guidance, parties, inter alia, bracketed references to land use, to enable more parties to engage on related options.
On the text proposals on cooperative approaches and mechanisms, parties made minor amendments. Several parties also requested to add references to INDCs alongside those to nationally determined mitigation contributions/nationally determined mitigation commitments or contributions. Parties agreed to forward the new text proposals, as amended, to the contact group as a starting point for discussions.
On Thursday, 3 December, in the contact group, the EU, Colombia for AILAC, the US, and others said that the INDCs imply self-differentiation. The EU stated all countries should seek economy-wide targets but there should not be shared timelines. The US added that developing countries should be eligible for support in implementing their contributions, and LDCs and others should have flexibility to submit at their discretion without expectation. Japan stated that only vulnerable countries should have “partly conditional” INDCs.
Sudan, for the African Group, and Malaysia, for the LMDCs, underlined that developed country parties should have quantified economy-wide targets. South Africa said binding obligations to implement should “back up” developed countries’ commitment to take the lead.
On Friday, 4 December, the EU, supported by Colombia for AILAC, Maldives for the Alliance of Small Islands States (AOSIS), and the US called for clarifying the date for the submission of contributions. Nicaragua and Bolivia called for Mother Earth to be reinserted in the text. Bolivia, with Venezuela, urged the inclusion of non-market mechanisms.
Adaptation, and Loss and Damage (draft Articles 4 and 5) and Associated Decision Text: In the spin-off group, parties’ discussions focused on: the global goal or long-term vision; links between mitigation and adaptation; and cooperation. On the links between adaptation and mitigation, several parties supported referencing that the more parties mitigate, the less all countries will need to adapt, as a universal concept. Two parties underlined the need for this to be factually correct, noting that regardless of mitigation actions there will be a need for countries to adapt. A group of parties underlined the need for an assessment of the adequacy of support from developed countries and recognition of the adaptation efforts by developing countries, or increasing adaptation costs and needs, and the limits to adaptation.
On the cluster of paragraphs related to cooperation, a group of developing country parties, supported by a developed country party, underlined the importance of strengthening institutional arrangements, and another noted a proposal to create a technical and knowledge platform. The US, EU and Canada suggested that the paragraph on the adequacy of support could be in decision text or the global stocktake.
On Wednesday, 2 December, in the contact group, Co-Facilitator Andrea Guerrero (Colombia) reported that despite progress on some parts of the text, there was substantial work remaining. On Thursday, 3 December, Bolivia, for the Group of 77 and China (G-77/China), asked to include details on a long-term vision and urged avoiding prescriptive language.
On Thursday, 3 December, Tuvalu expressed worry that there had not been substantive discussions on loss and damage in the spin-off group and urged reinsertion of language on loss and damage that preserves the issue as an independent article.
Finance (draft Article 6) and Associated Decision Text: Parties addressed finance in the context of the new agreement during the ADP contact group meetings and debated textual proposals in spin-off group meetings and party-led informal informal meetings throughout the week.
In the spin-off group, on Tuesday, 1 December, parties focused on ex ante communications and their linkages with the global stocktake, scale and scaling up, actions and commitments, as well as on predictability and institutional arrangements in informal informal meetings.
On institutional arrangements, parties identified some bridging proposals and discussed, inter alia: the necessity of listing existing funds in the text; relevance of existing guidance from the COP to the operating entities; and the ability of the CMA to recommend decisions to the COP.
On Thursday, 3 December, parties agreed on language stating that the provision of financial resources should or shall aim to achieve a balance between adaption and mitigation, taking into account country-driven strategies, and the priorities and needs of developing countries. Parties exchanged views: on the special treatment and access modalities for LDCs and African countries; the need to simplify procedures for accessing financial resources; whether certain provisions on measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) of support could be better placed within the transparency section of the agreement; text on enabling environments, results-based payments, carbon pricing and variety of sources, among others.
New textual proposals, including developing country parties’ needs and food security, prompted many parties to express concern about little progress and one group suggested “moving on to the next stage at the political level.” Parties agreed that the co-facilitators and Secretariat would capture the discussions in a revised version, which was then presented back to the contact group.
During the contact group meetings on Thursday and Friday, 3-4 December, delegates expressed their respective views on differentiation and MRV in the context of the provision of support, predictability of support, and the issue of balancing support between mitigation and adaptation.
Technology Development and Transfer (draft Article 7) and Associated Decision Text: The ADP decided to create a spin-off group on this topic on Sunday, 29 November, and the spin-off group reported back as needed.
A group of developing country parties introduced a new bridging proposal on the technology framework. After numerous amendments to the proposal, including on the role of developing countries and economies in transition and the need to enhance support for technology development and transfer, Co-Facilitator Mpanu-Mpanu agreed to forward the proposal as originally formulated.
Discussions in the spin-off groups further focused on the continued use of the TEC and the CTCN, with the possibility of supporting technology research, development and demonstration.
Capacity Building (draft Article 8) and Associated Decision Text: The ADP decided to create a spin-off group on this topic, which first met on Monday, 30 November, developing bridging proposals for options on objective, principles, support and reporting.
Transparency (draft Article 9) and Associated Decision Text: On Tuesday, 1 December, in the spin-off group, parties focused on support to developing countries for transparency. Parties discussed how to clarify that support for the Cancun MRV system will continue, and differed on whether developing countries “shall” or “be eligible to” receive support. The group then met informally to discuss the latter issue.
On Wednesday, 2 December, parties identified respective views: on text providing for the CMA to adopt common modalities, procedures and guidelines; and a proposed text for a provision on providing, in the transparency framework, flexibility for developing countries, in light of their capabilities, capacities, or capacity-building support received.
The group also discussed placing in the agreement or decision text provisions on: types or modalities of flexibility; a periodic review of future transparency modalities and guidelines; and providing for the transparency system to be guided by Convention principles and to be implemented in, inter alia, a non-intrusive, non-punitive manner respectful of national sovereignty. Parties further discussed these paragraphs informally.
On Thursday, 3 December, discussions focused on revised text on agreement paragraphs related to the purpose of transparency systems for action and support, and provision of information, and on decision text paragraphs related to transparency.
On the paragraphs on provision of information, some countries expressed hesitation to language on, inter alia, frequency, pointing to a lack of textual assurances on support for improving national capabilities. Others expressed willingness to explore text that would provide such assurances.
On the decision paragraphs, parties discussed, inter alia, the level of detail required in providing guidance for development of modalities and procedures for transparency.
Parties agreed that Co-Facilitator Kwok would develop bridging proposals based on parties’ oral and textual inputs.
During discussions in the contact group, parties discussed the MRV of information provided by parties, several parties proposed a wider scope for facilitative dialogue that would go beyond mitigation. The EU expressed flexibility on this, suggesting referring to the purpose of the agreement. China and Saudi Arabia expressed concern that a facilitative dialogue could represent an ex ante review and opposed this. The EU and the US said a dialogue would inform the next round of INDCs.
On Thursday, 3 December, the LDCs opposed a one-size-fits-all approach to reporting. The EU, Colombia for AILAC, the US, and others supported a common framework, with flexibility regarding the timing and detail in the reporting, and with support to developing countries.
On Friday, 4 December, India urged inclusion of MRV of finance from developed countries in the agreement article on transparency.
Global Stocktake (draft Article 10) and Associated Decision Text: The spin-off group first convened on Wednesday, 2 December. Discussions focusing on the decision portion of the text, centered around inputs to the global stocktake, including: connections with the long-term goal; relevance of individual and overall or aggregate efforts; outcomes of the 2013-2015 review; linkages with MRV processes; the role of non-state actors; and the possibility of a no text option on inputs for the global stocktake to avoid a prescriptive approach.
Parties also exchanged views on, inter alia: the need for and degree of specificity in modalities for a body to prepare for entry into force; the possibility of aligning the IPCC’s work with the global stocktake; and request to the SBSTA to provide advice on how the IPCC assessment reports could inform the stocktaking.
Focusing on the agreement portion of the text, parties debated language on MOI and purpose and the “outcome” of the stocktake. Parties agreed that the co-facilitator and Secretariat would capture the discussions in a revised version, which was then presented back to the contact group.
Implementation and Compliance, and Final Clauses (draft Article 11, 12-26) and Associated Decision Text: On final clauses and associated decision text, the ADP contact group discussed decision paragraphs not allocated to spin-off groups. Other compliance issues and final clauses were addressed by the compliance spin-off group and in informal discussions.
On Monday, 30 November, in the spin-off group, parties discussed the rules of procedure for the CMA. Many parties supported having the CMA adopt its own rules of procedure, or using the draft rules of procedure used by the COP. Some parties expressed support for developing the rules of procedure for the CMA before it meets, and suggested that if that option was not possible, a work programme could be developed for the adoption of such rules. Another delegation noted that such a work programme could prejudge that the CMA needs new rules of procedure. Colombia suggested a consultative process to determine if new rules of procedure are required and, if so, to develop the rules. Several parties supported only using the COP’s rules of procedure without any additional processes.
Workstream 2: Pre-2020 ambition was primarily discussed in a spin-off group, starting on Monday, 30 November. In addition, informal consultations were held throughout the week, resulting in “clean” paragraphs on, inter alia, inviting developed countries to increase pledges under the Cancun Agreements, housing of the mitigation technical examination process (TEP), and assessment of the TEP. The informal consultations also considered the institutional location, timing and content of a new adaptation TEP.
During spin-off group discussions, developed country parties called for focusing on the mitigation section of the text, including the role of non-party stakeholders, the existing TEP’s institutional location going forward and linkages to Convention bodies, while developing country parties emphasized accelerated implementation and adaptation.
On mitigation, parties introduced compromise language on paragraphs related to the participation of relevant experts in the TEP, engaging the operating entities of the Financial Mechanism in the Technical Expert Meetings and involving two high-level champions in preparing the summary for policymakers. One party proposed language welcoming the Montreal Protocol’s work on hydrofluorocarbons, and the importance of addressing shipping and aviation emissions. Many opposed introducing language at this point in the negotiations.
On accelerated implementation, three groups of parties supported an option on an accelerated implementation process to assess progress on closing the mitigation and adaptation gaps and adequacy of MOI. Others introduced a bridging proposal on a paragraph establishing a facilitative dialogue in conjunction with COP 23. Preferring the “no text” option, developed country parties opposed inclusion of this section in the decision, noting overlaps with other assessment processes.
On adaptation, parties diverged on the content, institutional location and timing of a proposed adaptation TEP, with one group of parties opposed to housing it under an existing institution, such as the Adaptation Committee.
On support, one developing country party requested “a concrete roadmap” be inserted for achieving the US$100 billion goal. Opposing this language, a developed country party suggested recalling Decision 1/CP.19 (Further Advancing the Durban Platform), paragraphs 3 and 4(e), on accelerating the full implementation of the Bali Action Plan and increasing MOI support from developed countries. Another developing country party called for language on a 2016-2017 review of gaps in implementation of developed country parties’ mitigation commitments and MOI provision.
On the preamble of the workstream 2 draft decision text, one party proposed, opposed by many, referencing the Montreal Protocol’s work on hydrofluorocarbons and international transport emissions, instead of including them in the mitigation section, as a compromise. One party requested bracketing 1.5°C, and adding “in accordance with common but differentiated responsibilities (CBDR)” to a paragraph on recognizing the importance of international and regional cooperation in mobilizing ambitious climate action by all.
Parties agreed the co-facilitators would consult with the ADP Co-Chairs on remaining contentious issues.
ADP CLOSING: On Saturday morning, 5 December, in the ADP contact group, ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder presented ADP draft conclusions (FCCC/ADP/2015/L.6), with the draft agreement and decision text on workstream 1 and 2 in Annex I, and a reflection note in Annex II providing textual suggestions by parties. He explained that the draft text had not changed from the compilation text with bridging proposals, and that should there be a comment that a party was unable to make due to time constraints, or an inaccuracy or omission in the reflection note, parties could make submissions until 1:00 pm on Saturday, 5 December. The contact group agreed to forward the draft conclusions to the ADP plenary.
ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder then opened the ADP closing plenary. After thanking the parties and co-facilitators for their hard work and dedication, ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder turned to ADP agenda item 3 (implementation of all the elements of Decision 1/CP.17), noting significant progress had been made in reducing gaps between parties’ positions, and saying the ADP’s work would now be passed on to the COP to “complete the last leg.”
Following assurances by ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder that, inter alia, the reflections note would be revised to include parties’ remaining comments and “nothing has been decided or left behind,” including the issue of loss and damage, the ADP adopted conclusions (FCCC/ADP/2015/L.6) to be forwarded to the COP for further consideration.
Laurence Tubiana, COP 21 Presidency, assured parties that negotiations would continue on the basis of the ADP text that was agreed. She highlighted the importance of party ownership to make progress.
In closing, ADP Rapporteur Yang Liu (China) presented, and parties adopted, the report of the meeting (FCCC/ADP/2015/L.5).
Saying that “sometimes words cannot capture our feelings,” ADP Co-Chair Djoghlaf congratulated parties for their achievement so far, and thanked parties for their trust.
UNFCCC Executive Secretary Christiana Figueres noted her appreciation for the full dedication of parties on this “complex” task and said work needed to continue next week.
Thanking all, ADP Co-Chair Reifsnyder gaveled ADP 2-12 to a close at 1:07 pm.
COP 21 
DURBAN PLATFORM FOR ENHANCED ACTION (DECISION 1/CP.17): Report of the ADP: Following the closure of ADP 2-12, this item (FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.1, FCCC/ADP/2014/4, FCCC/ADP/2015/2-5, FCCC/CP/2015/4, FCCC/TP/2015/4 and Adds.1-2, and ADP.2015.6.NonPaper) was considered by the COP on Saturday evening, 5 December. ADP Co-Chairs Reifsnyder and Djoghlaf presented and transmitted the draft agreement and decision and reflection note (FCCC/ADP/2015/L.6/Rev.1 and Add.1) to the COP. The report of the ADP was adopted.
Parties agreed to the mode of work outlined by COP 21 President Fabius, including work in the Comité de Paris, an open-ended single-setting group, presided over by the COP 21 President, to progress the text and facilitate compromise. He said the Comité de Paris would work under the principle, inter alia, of “nothing is agreed until everything is agreed,” and its meetings would be transmitted to screens at the conference site to facilitate transparency.
He stated that the outcome should be concluded in time for a review group on legal and linguistic matters to address related issues before Friday, 11 December.
South Africa, for the G-77/China, emphasized the importance of clarity and predictability in the negotiation process, and asked that the reflection note be updated with suggestions that are still missing.
Maldives, for AOSIS, asked for clarity on how the issues of adaptation, and loss and damage would be handled.
Sudan, for the African Group, noted that important issues have been left out of the agreement, but expressed certainty that parties will address these issues. Marshall Islands called for the Paris agreement to include, inter alia, a 1.5°C temperature goal and assurances on long-term climate finance.
Australia, for the Umbrella Group, said the ADP text is party-driven and party-owned. Saudi Arabia, for the Arab Group, emphasized that setting a goal for governments’ efforts “needs to be substantiated by proven science,” provided by the IPCC.
Guatemala, for AILAC, called for awareness that “this is our text and it will be our ability to listen to one another and our ability to articulate our needs” that will enable an effective agreement. Angola, for the LDCs, expressed disappointment that the COP Bureau “formulation” was used to form the legal and linguistic review group, excluding the LDCs.
Malaysia, for the LMDCs, underscored the group’s commitment to goodwill and expressed concern over the repeated use of the refrain “the world has changed.” China underlined that an ambitious Paris outcome should give equal weight to all of the Durban mandate components and said developed countries should take the lead.
Azerbaijan asked his insertions to be incorporated into the reflection note. Turkey asked to be considered as a group for consultations on negotiations. Nepal highlighted the fragility of mountain ecosystems.
Comité de Paris: On Saturday, 5 December, after accepting the draft text from the ADP, COP  21 President Fabius outlined three principles for the Comité that: nothing is agreed until everything is agreed; all parties are included; and transparency is upheld.
He announced four informal ministerial consultations, referred to as indabas, that would convene under the Comité, on: support, facilitated by Emmanuel Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) and Jochen Flasbarth (Germany); differentiation in the context of mitigation, transparency and finance, including pre-2020 finance, facilitated by Izabella Teixeira (Brazil) and Vivian Balakrishnan (Singapore); and ambition, long-term objectives and periodic review, facilitated by Pa Ousman (The Gambia) and Amber Rudd (UK).
On Monday, 7 December, COP President Fabius announced additional indabas on: adaptation, and loss and damage, led by René Orellana (Bolivia) and Åsa Romson (Sweden); cooperative approaches and mechanisms, led by Catherine McKenna (Canada) and Raymond Tshibanda N’Tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo); and forests, led by Daniel Vicente Ortega Pacheco (Ecuador), Doris Leuthard (Switzerland) and Henri Djombo (Republic of the Congo). He also announced a working group on response measures, led by Jan Szyszko (Poland) and Khaled Mohamed Fahmy Abdelall (Egypt) and an indaba on the preamble, led by Claudia Salerno (Venezuela), and on facilitating implementation and compliance, led by Rafael Pacchiano (Mexico).
The indabas met Sunday, 6 December, through Tuesday, 8 December, and the Comité met Monday, 7 December, through Wednesday, 9 December, to hear reports from most of the indabas. The Comité continued to meet until Saturday, 12 December.
On support/MOI, the co-facilitators reported progress toward possible common ground on, inter alia, provision of support and mobilization of climate finance, and reported reassurances regarding the fulfillment of existing commitments and continued leadership of developed countries. They outlined specific proposed language on how the role of other parties could be captured, such as “voluntary contributions,” “contributions by others in a position/willing/able to do so,” or reference to South-South cooperation, but also reported that some parties expressed strong reservations, calling for consistency with existing provisions and principles of the Convention.
The co-facilitators reported that parties found convergence in the draft article on technology development and transfer (Article 7), and related decision text, with common ground on, inter alia, cooperative action, long-term vision and the technology framework.
On capacity building, they reported agreement on a Paris Committee on Capacity-building and an understanding on a long-term work programme on capacity building, and said work would continue on the modalities of the committee.
On differentiation, the co-facilitators said that assurances of no backsliding on commitments and that developed countries would continue to take the lead “resonated strongly.” On differentiation in the sections on transparency and finance, they reported on assurances that developed countries will continue to take the lead without backsliding, and on general convergence that differentiation will be operationalized through flexibility for developing countries.
On transparency, they reported “broad acknowledgement” that capacity building and support are key reflections of differentiation and, on finance, reported that several parties underscored there is no intention to create new legal obligations for developing countries, but an encouragement to voluntarily contribute.
On Wednesday, 9 December, co-facilitator Balakrishnan noted that “parties are not yet ready to place their final positions on the table,” saying the co-facilitators would work with the Presidency and Secretariat to crystallize existing fault lines in the text.
On ambition, the co-facilitators reported convergence on a common “global moment” every five years to take stock and review aggregate progress, and provide an opportunity to confirm or raise targets, but without an obligation to do so. They said that, while several developed and developing country parties indicated willingness to refer to a 1.5°C limit, others reaffirmed the temperature limit in the Cancun Agreements.
On Wednesday, 9 December, they reported that most parties were willing to reflect a 1.5°C temperature limit in the purpose of the agreement, with accompanying provisions related to sustainable development, MOI, equity, and food security.
On pre-2020, the co-facilitators reported parties considered a compromise proposal containing a facilitative dialogue, potentially in 2017, which would examine the state of, and options to further enhance, implementation under the Convention for all parties with a stronger focus on developed countries’ undertakings. They relayed that parties had found common ground on an adaptation TEP that would add value, as long as it does not duplicate work under existing bodies under the Convention. They reported emerging convergence on mirroring the mitigation TEP’s institutional arrangements for an adaptation TEP, with a key role for the Adaptation Committee. On accelerating implementation, they noted divergence of views.
On cooperative approaches, the co-facilitators reported that parties considered guiding principles, including, inter alia: environmental integrity; avoiding double counting; and the voluntary nature of such approaches. On mechanisms to support sustainable development (draft Article 3ter), she reported some parties stressed that such mechanisms would need to be durable over time, while others said they should not be part of the agreement.
On adaptation, and loss and damage, the co-facilitators highlighted landing zones on: a clear goal for adaptation, with a link to Convention Article 2 (objective); recognition of the link between mitigation and adaptation; and a communication process that is flexible and does not further burden developing countries. They also highlighted crosscutting issues needing resolution, including references to a temperature goal, vulnerability and CBDR. On loss and damage, they noted ongoing discussions on institutional arrangements, saying there was no convergence.
On facilitating implementation and compliance, the co-facilitator noted general acknowledgement on the need for the agreement to define nature and purpose, leaving modalities and procedures for later. He identified divergence on whether or not to reflect differentiation in this part.
On Wednesday, 9 December, COP 21 President Fabius presented a revised draft text of the Paris outcome. Parties welcomed the transparency of the process, and accepted the text as a basis for negotiations. Many parties expressed some concerns with the text.
South Africa, for the G-77/China, and Egypt, for the African Group, noted concern on “delinking” textual language from the Convention and dilution of Convention principles, particularly on differentiation. The G-77/China lamented the lack of adequate resources on MOI and, with the LMDCs, expressed concern about the lack of text regarding unilateral measures. She further called for a distinct article on loss and damage.
Malaysia, for the LMDCs, emphasized capturing CBDR and expressed concern on language on nationally determined mitigation contributions. With the Arab Group, he opposed references to carbon pricing. He further underscored that progress under workstream 2 is fundamental for progress under workstream 1.
Australia, for the Umbrella Group, stressed developed countries’ continued assurances to continue to lead in the context of a universal agreement in which all parties do their best.
Angola, for the LDCs, highlighted the need to ensure access to finance.
The African Group noted concern on the reflection of individual commitments without references to support and worried that key elements to operationalize the global goal on adaptation were missing.
The EU underlined that after 2020 countries in a position to do so should join in increasing financial flows to countries in need and expressed concern that the mechanism to raise ambition over time had been significantly weakened.
Saudi Arabia, for the Arab Group, further expressed concern with references to “those in a position to do so” and called for the reinstatement of adaptation co-benefits coming in the “form” of mitigation. He, and the EU, noted the lack of a double threshold for compliance.
The Maldives, for AOSIS, with Barbados for the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and many others, stressed a below 1.5°C goal as critical. He underscored ongoing work among parties on language regarding loss and damage.
Guatemala, for AILAC, said the preamble should include a reference to gender and supported a quantified or quantifiable unilateral component in “features” under the mitigation article. She called for a registry of adaptation actions.
On Thursday, 10 December, COP 21 President Fabius presented a revised draft text at 9:00 pm, and announced that two groups would meet in parallel throughout the night, an “indaba of solutions,” chaired by himself, and an informal consultation, chaired by COP 20 President Manuel Pulgar-Vidal (Peru).
During the indaba of solutions, parties discussed differentiation, ambition and finance. Many expressed support for differentiation, but disagreed on the extent to which differentiation should be reflected in the various provisions on mitigation, transparency and finance, among others. One party called the INDCs a “monument to differentiation,” while another underscored that the differences between developed and developing countries must be reflected in the transparency system.
A spin-off group on differentiation reported progress on mitigation and transparency. Many parties underlined the need to reflect a 1.5 °C temperature goal, which a few parties opposed. Several supported the need for five-year cycles.
On Friday, 11 December, parties met in informal consultations and conducted bilaterals throughout the day to resolve key issues surrounding ambition, differentiation and finance.
On Saturday, 12 December, the Comité de Paris reconvened at 11:30 am. COP 21 President Fabius announced the final text of a balanced ambitious agreement would be distributed after the meeting, underscoring it contained “the principle elements that we felt would be impossible to achieve: being differentiated, fair, durable, dynamic, balanced and legally binding.” He stressed that this agreement is necessary for the entire world and for each country, that it will help island countries, expedite financial means, and assist fossil fuel countries in the attempt to diversify their economies, while aiding all countries in building low-carbon economies.
Noting the world has come to a defining moment on a journey dating back decades, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said parties would be presented with a document that is historic and promises to set the world on a new path to a low-emission, climate-resilient world. Underscoring that time has come to acknowledge that national interest is best served by acting in global solidarity, he called on parties to “finish the job” in a spirit of compromise.
Stressing “history is here” and postponement is not possible, French President François Hollande said negotiations had reached a decisive moment and only parties could answer the question: “Do we want an agreement?” Describing the draft text as ambitious but also realistic, he called on delegates to seize the opportunity to change the world by adopting the first universal agreement on climate change.
COP 21 President Fabius explained the final version of the draft Paris outcome was being translated into all UN languages and would be available at 1:30 pm. He suggested parties examine the text and that the Comité de Paris convene in plenary to take up “a series of necessary procedures.”
At 5:30 pm, COP 21 President Fabius re-opened the Comité de Paris and outlined the organization of work: report back by the co-chairs of the open-ended group of legal and linguistic experts; clarifying remarks on the draft Paris outcome by the Secretariat (FCCC/CP/2015/L.9); and transmittal of the draft Paris outcome to the COP.
On the legal and linguistic review, Co-Chair Jimena Nieto Carrasco (Colombia) said the group had met on Thursday, 10 December, and Saturday, 12 December. She said the group recommended making technical amendments, noting that the language in translations in the draft agreement should be consistent with the Kyoto Protocol when the English version parallels the Protocol, and spelling out all of the acronyms.
UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary Richard Kinley listed technical corrections. These are now reflected in the revised document (FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1).
COP 21 President Fabius proposed and the parties agreed to transmit to the COP the draft Paris Agreement, reflecting the technical amendments made by the legal and linguistic review group and the Secretariat. The Comité de Paris closed at 7:25 pm.
Adoption of a Protocol, Another Legal Instrument, or an Agreed Outcome with Legal Force under the Convention Applicable to All Parties: The COP plenary convened to consider the draft Paris Agreement at 7:25 pm on Saturday, 12 December. COP 21 President Fabius invited the COP to adopt the decision contained in the document. With no objections, the Paris Agreement was adopted at 7:26 pm. Many parties lauded the Agreement and the work of the French Presidency in achieving it. Many noted that while the Agreement is not perfect, it is necessary.
Quoting Nelson Mandela on “the long road to freedom,” South Africa noted there is further technical work needed on the decisions and on increasing finance pre-2020.
Australia, for the Umbrella Group, said COP 21 has produced a global agreement that creates a framework for all nations to play a part in securing a prosperous future, noting the Agreement confirms that developed countries will continue to lead in providing support for climate action, while recognizing the important role that others can play.
Lamenting the COP 21 Presidency had not acknowledged his country before adopting the Agreement, Nicaragua stressed the Agreement should include a paragraph allowing for the calculation of a global carbon budget in line with historical responsibilities and climate justice in case the results of the INDCs do not keep the global average temperature below 1.5°C from pre-industrial levels, and text allowing for the creation of a compensation fund based on historical responsibilities. He also lamented not being able to register reservations to the Agreement.
Switzerland, for Environmental Integrity Group, described the Agreement as legally-binding, ambitious and fair, saying it is flexible for future developments and provides an ambitious basis for combating climate change.
Welcoming the “historic agreement” as a landmark that will provide security and stability, the EU emphasized “we all have to translate this agreement to concrete actions.” Echoing that “today we can celebrate but tomorrow we have to act,” the EU noted the launch of the High-Ambition Coalition and underscored the EU “will scale up financial support as of 2020 and make it more predictable.”
Egypt, on behalf of African Group, said the historic Paris Agreement had “far reaching consequences” for sustainable development and asked the COP 21 Presidency to convene consultations on Africa’s special circumstances at SB 44. Sudan, for the African Group, emphasized issues of financing and transparency of support as the backbone of the implementation of the agreement.
Saint Lucia, for CARICOM, described the Paris Agreement as a resounding triumph of multilateralism and welcomed increased ambition, in the form of the 1.5°C goal, and the separate treatment of loss and damage in the agreement.
Maldives, for AOSIS, highlighted a recent and significant shift in action on climate change and bigger commitments in capitals around the world, and said “history will not judge us from what we did today, but what we do from this day forward.”
Underscoring the importance and inclusion of human rights and gender, Colombia, for AILAC, lauded the Agreement for not only being applicable to all but also for belonging to all.
Saudi Arabia, for the Arab Group, congratulated the entire world for achieving an agreement that “allows us to better achieve sustainable development.”
Panama, for Coalition for Rainforest Nations, said the mechanism to implement REDD+ would allow state and non-state actors to participate and serve communities that depend on the ecosystem services provided by tropical forests.
Angola, for the LDCs, noted the Agreement is applicable to all and encourages movement toward a common global temperature goal of 1.5°C through, inter alia, periodic reviews, global stocktake, and the recognition of specific needs.
Suggesting the Paris Agreement is only the beginning, President Hollande announced France will commit to revising, by 2020, its GHG emission reduction target and its financial contribution, in particular to adaptation in vulnerable countries, and invited all to join a coalition to achieve a carbon price to reorient investments “starting from tomorrow.”
Describing the Paris Agreement as a “monumental success for the planet and its people,” UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon identified “solid results on all key points.”
UNFCCC Executive Secretary Christiana Figueres said the Paris Climate Change Conference builds successfully on years of work by government delegates, individuals and institutions, and described the Paris Agreement as one of conviction, representing solidarity with the most vulnerable and a long-term vision to “turn this new legal framework into an engine of safe growth for the rest of this century.”
Turkey said he expected the COP 21 Presidency to work towards finding a solution to issues raised by Turkey, related to parties with special circumstances that have been recognized by the COP having access to support under the agreement. COP 21 President Fabius assured he would undertake consultations on the issue.
Describing the agreement as fair, just, comprehensive, ambitious, effective and durable, China said it also reflects the balance between mitigation and adaptation, and action and support.
The US said the Paris Agreement, inter alia: “empowers us” to chart a new path forward while preventing the most devastating consequences of climate change, and sends a critical message to the global marketplace, while inspiring technological breakthroughs.
Noting that the agreement could have been more ambitious, particularly on the “fair share” by developed countries, India welcomed the Paris Agreement highlighting, among others, consistent application of differentiation.
Morocco said her country, as host of COP 22 in Marrakesh in 2016, would work with all stakeholders towards making the Paris Agreement operational.
Venezuela and Bolivia welcomed the Agreement’s inclusion of, inter alia, climate justice and Mother Earth.
Senegal highlighted the “fully fledged” role of adaptation in the Paris Agreement and urged future work on support for vulnerable countries through internationally transferred mitigation outcomes. Ecuador called for quantifiable targets and highlighted the role of low emission development strategies.
The Philippines emphasized that the Agreement enshrines human rights and promised that his country, leading the Climate Vulnerable Forum, would continue to lead and sustain the fight against climate change for a safe and resilient future. Jamaica called the Paris Agreement a fair agreement that can be built upon, highlighting the reference to 1.5°C and loss and damage as a separate article.
Noting her country’s lapel pins made of dried coconut fronds are worn by members of the High-Ambition Coalition, a youth representative from the Marshall Islands said “if this is the story of islands it is a story of the world.” Tuvalu highlighted the leadership of his Prime Minister and said the Paris Agreement, in saving Tuvalu, will have saved the world.
Chile welcomed the recognition of carbon pricing, noting the Paris outcome marks the “beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era.”
Bahamas congratulated COP 21 for delivering a legally-binding agreement that addresses the needs of SIDS, and looked forward to advancing the WIM.
 Brazil saw implementation of the Agreement as a means of strengthening the multilateral system and called multilateralism “the best way to address our common challenges.”
Papua New Guinea, with the Central African Republic, expressed “satisfaction that REDD+ has been incorporated in the Paris Agreement.”
Guinea hoped the funds announced for capacity building and technology transfer would be effective.
Palestine announced his country would submit the instrument of accession to the UNFCCC, expressing his country’s pride for becoming the 196th member state and 197th party to the Convention.
Stressing “we are stronger together,” Business and Industry NGOs welcomed the role of the private sector in the Agreement.
Noting with concern that current INDCs remain “dangerously inadequate,” Climate Action Network (CAN), for Environmental NGOs (ENGOs), called on parties to improve their pledges in 2018 so that all will have ambitious targets for 2025.
Suggesting that “the denial in this room is palpable,” Climate Justice Now!, for ENGOs, said the Agreement is weak but the climate justice movement is strong and will deliver an energy revolution that serves people.
Expressing commitment to partnering to implement the Paris Agreement, Research and Independent NGOs said scientists and educators will provide support through, inter alia, building capacity, developing programmes and proposing policies.
Trade Unions noted that the Agreement would set the right goals but lacks clarity on mechanisms for its implementation.
Women and Gender called for an operationalization of gender equality “not a mere recognition of it.”
Youth lamented countries of the North had exempted themselves from assuming liability for climate change, “which your generation caused.”
Local Government and Municipal Authorities welcomed Morocco’s announcement to build on the Lima-Paris Action Agenda for COP 22.
Indigenous Peoples highlighted that their three messages had been partly incorporated into the agreement, though not to the full extent requested: rights of indigenous peoples; temperature goal of under 1.5°C; and recognition and respect for traditional knowledge.
Paris Agreement and Associated Decision: Paris Agreement: The Paris Agreement (annexed to FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1) includes 16 preambular clauses and 29 operative clauses. The preamble addresses, among others:
Article 1 (Definitions): The definitions contained in Convention Article 1 apply to this Agreement. In addition “Convention” means the UNFCCC, “Conference of the Parties” means the COP of the Convention, and “Party” means party to the Agreement.
Article 2 (Purpose): This Agreement, in enhancing the implementation of the Convention, including its objective, aims to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty, including by:
This Agreement will be implemented to reflect equity and the principle of CBDR and respective capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.
Article 3 (Mitigation): As nationally determined contributions (NDCs) to the global response to climate change, all parties are to undertake and communicate ambitious efforts as defined in Articles 4, 7, 9, 10, 11 and 13 with the view to achieving the purpose of this Agreement (Article 2). The efforts of all parties will represent a progression over time, while recognizing the need to support developing country parties for the effective implementation of this Agreement.
Article 4 (Individual Contributions): This article provides that:
Article 5 (Forests): This article provides that:
Article 6 (Cooperative Approaches): This article provides that:
Article 7 (Adaptation): This article provides that:
Article 8 (loss and damage): This article provides that:
Article 9 (finance): This article provides that:
Article 10 (technology development and transfer): This article provides that:
Article 11 (capacity building): This article provides that:
Article 12 (education, training and public awareness): Parties shall cooperate in taking measures, as appropriate, to enhance climate change education, training, public awareness, public participation and public access to information, recognizing the importance of these steps with respect to enhancing actions under this Agreement.
Article 13 (transparency): This article provides that:
Article 14 (global stocktake): This article provides that:
Article 15 (implementation and compliance): This article provides that:
The remaining articles of the Agreement include institutional provisions and final clauses: Article 16 (Conference of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to the Agreement); Article 17 (Secretariat); Article 18 (SBSTA and SBI); Article 19 (Other SBs); Article 20 (Signature and Ratification); Article 21 (Entry Into Force); Article 22 (Amendment); Article 23 (Adoption and Amendment of Annexes); Article 24 (Settlement of Disputes); Article 25 (Voting); Article 26 (Depositary); Article 27 (Reservations); Article 28 (Withdrawal); and Article 29 (Official Languages). Article 21 on entry into force contains a double threshold, requiring ratification by at least 55 parties accounting for at least an estimated 55% of total global GHG emissions to enter into force.
Associated Decision: In the associated decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1), on adoption, the COP:
On INDCs, the COP:
Under the sub-heading “Decisions to give effect to the Agreement,” the COP addresses a number of issues including mitigation, adaptation, loss and damage, finance, technology development and transfer, capacity building, transparency of action and support, global stocktake, facilitating implementation and compliance, and final clauses.
On mitigation, the COP, inter alia:
On adaptation, the COP, inter alia:
On loss and damage, the COP, inter alia:
On finance, the COP, inter alia:  
On technology development and transfer, the COP, inter alia:
On capacity building, the COP, inter alia:
On transparency of action and support, the COP, inter alia:
On the global stocktake, the COP, inter alia:
On final clauses, the COP also requests the Secretariat, solely for the purposes of Agreement Article 21 (entry into force), to make available on its website on the date of adoption of the Agreement as well as in the report of COP 21, information on the most up-to-date total and percent of GHG emissions communicated by parties to the Convention in their NCs, GHG inventory reports, biennial reports, or BURs.
Under the sub-heading enhanced action prior to 2020, the COP, inter alia:
On non-party stakeholders, the COP, inter alia, invites non-party stakeholders to scale up their efforts and support actions to reduce emissions and/or to build resilience and decrease vulnerability to the adverse effects of climate change and demonstrate these efforts via the Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action platform.
On administrative and budgetary matters, the COP, inter alia, emphasizes the urgency of making additional resources available for the implementation of the relevant actions, including actions referred to in this decision, and the implementation of the work programme, and urges parties to make voluntary contributions for the timely implementation of this decision.
ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to apply the draft rules of procedure (FCCC/CP/1996/2), with the exception of draft rule 42 on voting.
The COP adopted the agenda (FCCC/CP/2015/1 and Add.1) as proposed, with the agenda item on the second review of the adequacy of Convention Articles 4.2(a) and (b) (developed countries’ mitigation) held in abeyance. The COP also agreed to the organization of work (FCCC/CP/2015/1, FCCC/SBSTA/2015/3, FCCC/SBI/2015/11 and FCCC/ADP/2013/1).
The COP referred to the SBI the items and sub-items on: reporting from and review of Annex I parties; reporting from non-Annex I parties; capacity building under the Convention; gender and climate change; matters relating to LDCs; the audit report and financial statements for 2014; and budget performance for the biennium 2014-2015.
The COP further referred to the SBI and SBSTA the items and sub-items on: the report of the Adaptation Committee; the WIM; the Joint Annual Report of the TEC and the CTCN; and the implementation of the Buenos Aires Programme of Work on Adaptation and Response Measures (Decision 1/CP.10).
Parties agreed to the accreditation of observer organizations (FCCC/CP/2015/5).
Election of Officers Other Than the President: On Tuesday, 1 December, COP 21 President Fabius said that consultations on the election of officers would be conducted. On Thursday, 10 December, the COP elected members of the COP Bureau: SBSTA Chair Carlos Fuller (Belize); SBI Chair Tomasz Chruszczow (Poland); COP Rapporteur Georg Børsting (Norway); Ismail El Gizouli (Sudan); Hakima El Haite (Morocco); Khalid Abuleif (Saudi Arabia); Ravi Shanker Prasad (India); Oleg Shamanov (Russian Federation); Walter Schuldt-Espinel (Ecuador); and Colin Beck (Solomon Islands).
The COP also elected the SBSTA Bureau, with Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) as Vice-Chair and Aderito M. F. Santana (São Tomé and Principe) as Rapporteur, and the SBI Bureau, with Zhihua Chen (China) as Vice-Chair and Sidat Yaffa (The Gambia) as Rapporteur.
The COP also elected the members of the Adaptation Committee, the Advisory Board of the CTCN, and the TEC, and took note of the nominations for the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention (CGE) and the LEG.
Dates and Venues of Future Sessions: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted a decision on the dates and venues of future sessions. Morocco, in the capacity of the host of COP 22/CMP 12, thanked parties, in particular the African Group, for their trust, informing that the conference would take place in Marrakesh, from 7-18 November 2016.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.4), the COP, inter alia,decides to accept with appreciation the offer by Morocco to host COP 22 and CMP 12, and requests the Executive Secretary to continue consultations with Morocco and to negotiate and finalize a Host Country Agreement. On COP 23/CMP 13, the COP notes that in keeping with the principle of rotation among regional groups, the President of COP 23/CMP 13 would come from the Asia-Pacific States, and invites parties to undertake further consultations on the hosting of those sessions.
Adoption of the Report on Credentials: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the report on credentials (FCCC/CP/2015/9, FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/7), in addition to the credentials for ten countries as reported orally by the Bureau.
REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the reports of SBI 42 and SBI 43 (FCCC/SBI/2015/10 and Add.1, and FCCC/SBI/2015/L.19), and the reports of SBSTA 42 and SBSTA 43 (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2 and Adds.1-2, and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.15).
DURBAN PLATFORM FOR ENHANCED ACTION (DECISION 1/CP.17): Report of the ADP: This item (FCCC/CP/2014/10/Add.1, FCCC/ADP/2014/4, FCCC/ADP/2015/2-5, FCCC/CP/2015/4, FCCC/TP/2015/4 and Adds.1-2, and ADP.2015.6.NonPaper) is summarized under the Paris Agreement (see page 4).
Adoption of a Protocol, Another Legal Instrument, or an Agreed Outcome with Legal Force under the Convention Applicable to All Parties: This item is summarized under the Paris Agreement (see page 4).
Consideration of Proposals by Parties Under Convention Article 17: This item was first taken up on Wednesday, 2 December. Parties agreed that, in line with previous practice, the item would be kept open and COP 21 Vice-President Cheikh Ndiaye Sylla (Senegal) would report to the closing plenary on proposals by Japan (FCCC/CP/2009/3), Tuvalu (FCCC/CP/2009/4), Australia (FCCC/CP/2009/5), Costa Rica (FCCC/CP/2009/6), the US (FCCC/CP/2009/7) and Grenada (FCCC/CP/2010/3).
On Sunday, 13 December, COP 21 President Fabius said that in light of the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the COP could conclude its consideration of these proposals. The COP closed the item with no conclusions.
CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSALS BY PARTIES FOR AMENDMENTS TO THE CONVENTION UNDER ARTICLE 15: Proposal from the Russian Federation: On Tuesday, 1 December, on amendments by parties under Article 15, COP Vice-President Sylla noted that the Russian proposal (FCCC/CP/2011/5) had been considered in informal consultations. Due to divergent views, the COP decided to include this item as a sub-item in the provisional agenda of COP 22.
Proposal from Papua New Guinea and Mexico: On Tuesday, 1 December, on the joint proposal by Papua New Guinea and Mexico on Convention Articles 17 and 18 (FCCC/CP/2011/4/Rev.1), Vice-President Sylla noted that informal consultations had not been able to resolve divergent views, and the item was forwarded to COP 22.
REPORT OF THE ADAPTATION COMMITTEE: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI agenda item on the Adaptation Committee (see page 33).
WARSAW INTERNATIONAL MECHANISM: This item was referred to the SBSTA and SBI for consideration. Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI agenda item on the WIM (see page 33).
DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TECHNOLOGY MECHANISM: Joint Annual Report of the TEC and the CTCN: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP took note of the report of the Technology Mechanism (FCCC/SB/2015/L.4).
Linkages between the Technology Mechanism and the Financial Mechanism of the Convention: On Wednesday, 2 December, parties agreed to hold informal consultations facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Elfriede More (Austria) on this item (FCCC/CP/2014/6, FCCC/SB/2015/1, FCCC/CP/2015/3 and Add.1). On Sunday, 13 December, the COP adopted a decision.  
Final Outcome: In its decision, the COP (FCCC/CP/2015/L.11), inter alia:
THE 2013-2015 REVIEW: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI (see page 35).
MATTERS RELATING TO FINANCE: Long-Term Climate Finance: On Wednesday, 2 December, parties decided to jointly consider this item (FCCC/CP/2015/2 and INF.1) with the sub-item on the report of the SCF (FCCC/CP/2015/8). Parties agreed to consider the items in a contact group co-chaired by Andrés Mogro (Ecuador) and Mark Storey (Sweden).
Noting ongoing negotiations under the ADP, parties had divergent views on where to discuss pre-2020 finance. Bolivia, for the G-77/China, requested a workshop on finance needs of developing countries. Malawi, for the LDCs, called for improving access to finance. After informal consultations, the COP adopted a decision on Thursday, 10 December.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.2) the COP, inter alia:
Report of the SCF: Parties considered this item (FCCC/CP/2015/8) together with long-term finance. On the report of the SCF, the EU, with South Africa for the African Group, proposed working on the basis of the draft decisions contained the SCF report. Co-Chairs Andrés Mogro (Ecuador) and Mark Storey (Sweden) invited proposals. After informal consultations, the COP adopted the decision on Thursday, 10 December.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.5), the COP, inter alia:
Report of the GCF to the COP and Guidance to the GCF: On Wednesday, 2 December, the COP agreed to establish a contact group to jointly consider this sub-item with the sub-item on report of the GEF to the COP and guidance to the GEF, co-chaired by Stefan Schwager (Switzerland) and Nauman Bashir Bhatti (Pakistan).
In the contact group on Thursday, 3 December, Co-Chair Bashir Bhatti introduced the item (FCCC/CP/2015/3, Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1, FCCC/CP/2015/8, INF.2 and MISC.1). Parties considered draft decision text proposed by the Co-Chairs in informal meetings throughout the week and in the contact group on Wednesday, 9 December. Views differed on requesting the GCF Board to agree on replenishment arrangements and on a reference that GCF projects will contribute to “low-emission and climate-resilient” or “sustainable” development. On Thursday, 10 December, in plenary, COP 21 Vice-President Sylla noted this sub-item was still under consideration. On Sunday, 13 December, the COP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.7/Rev.1), the COP, inter alia:
Report of the GEF to the COP and Guidance to the GEF: This item (FCCC/CP/2015/4 and Add.1, FCCC/CP/2015/8 and INF.2) was first considered on Wednesday, 2 December. Parties agreed to establish a contact group to jointly consider this sub-item with the sub-item on report from the GCF and guidance to the GCF, co-chaired by Stefan Schwager (Switzerland) and Nauman Bashir Bhatti (Pakistan).
Parties considered draft decision text proposed by the Co-Chairs in informal meetings throughout the week and in the contact group on Thursday, 3 December, and Wednesday, 9 December. Parties debated a proposal by Argentina, Uruguay and Colombia to delete reference to tackling “the drivers” of deforestation and forest degradation.
On support for the NAP process through contributions to the LDCF and the Special Climate Change Fund, China, supported by India and Malaysia, proposed deleting language inviting “parties that may make voluntary financial contributions” to provide such support. China explained its preference for South-South cooperation. The EU, with Japan and the US, suggested deletion of the entire paragraph if it lacks agreement. Stressing the importance of the paragraph, Zambia, for the LDCs, called for retaining the paragraph.
On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the decision. Antigua and Barbuda lamented the process of discussions on COP items on finance matters. She said that because focus was given to streamlining rather than to negotiations due to limited time, many issues important to SIDS were left out. She asked this to be reflected in the report of the COP.
Echoing the same concerns, Bolivia, for the G-77/China, said the group reserves its right to bring up these issues at the next SBI meeting. The EU noted that parties agreed, in light of the exceptional circumstances of COP 21, to focus on streamlining the decision. She expressed support for the approach taken and looked forward to discussing the items again at COP 22. COP 21 Vice-President Sylla said the comments will be reflected in the report of the COP.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.8), the COP, inter alia:
REPORTING FROM AND REVIEW OF ANNEX I PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 31).
REPORTING FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 31).
CAPACITY BUILDING UNDER THE CONVENTION: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 33).
IMPLEMENTATION OF CONVENTION ARTICLE 4.8 AND 4.9: Implementation of the Buenos Aires Programme of Work on Adaptation and Response Measures (Decision 1/CP.10): These discussions are summarized under the SBI agenda item on the impact of the implementation of response measures (see page 34) and the SBSTA item on the Nairobi work programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change (NWP) (see page 37).
Matters Related to LDCs: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 32).
GENDER AND CLIMATE CHANGE: These are summarized under the SBI (see page 36).
OTHER MATTERS REFERRED TO THE COP BY THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES: Issues Relating to REDD+: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP considered three draft decisions forwarded from SBSTA 42, on: further guidance on transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness when informing on how all the safeguards referred to in Decision 1/CP.16 (the Cancun Agreements), Appendix I, are being addressed and respected; alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests; and methodological issues related to non-carbon benefits resulting from the implementation of the activities referred to in Decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70. The COP adopted the decisions.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1) on further guidance on ensuring transparency, consistency, comprehensiveness and effectiveness when informing on how all the safeguards referred to in Decision 1/CP.16, Appendix I, are being addressed, the COP, inter alia:
In its decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1) on alternative policy approaches, such as joint mitigation and adaptation approaches for the integral and sustainable management of forests, the COP, inter alia:
In its decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.1) on methodological issues related to non-carbon benefits resulting from the implementation of the activities referred to in Decision 1/CP.16, paragraph 70, the COP, inter alia:
Methodologies for the Reporting of Financial Information by Annex I Parties: These discussions are summarized under the SBSTA (see page 38).
Annual Report on the Technical Review of GHG Inventories from Annex I Parties: These discussions are summarized under the SBSTA (see page 42).
Terms of Reference for the Immediate Review of the Doha Work Programme on Convention Article 6: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP considered a draft decision forwarded from SBI 42 on this item. The COP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1), the COP, inter alia:
NAPs: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 32).
ADMINISTRATIVE, FINANCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL MATTERS: Audit Report and Financial Statements for 2014: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 36).
Budget Performance for the Biennium 2014-2015: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 36).
Programme Budget for the Biennium 2016-2017: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted a decision forwarded by SBI 42 on the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1), the COP, inter alia:
Decision-Making in the UNFCCC Process: On Thursday, 10 December, the COP decided to continue to hold discussions on this item at SBI 44 and report to COP 22.
CONCLUSION OF THE SESSION: Adoption of the Report of COP 21: Following presentation of the report of the session (FCCC/CP/2015/L.1) by the Secretariat on behalf of Rapporteur Johanna Lissinger Peitz (Sweden), the COP adopted the report of the session.
Closure of the Session: The Secretariat reported on extra budgetary funds required, including €150,000 for matters related to economic diversification initiatives and €1.95 million for support to the Adaptation Committee. He explained that it was not possible to undertake an assessment of the implications of the Paris Agreement yet, but that a note on these financial implications would be posted to the UNFCCC website in the coming days.
COP 21 President Fabius invited, and parties agreed, to take note of the resolution presented by Morocco thanking France, as the host government, and the city of Paris (FCCC/CP/2015/L.3).
COP 21 President Fabius closed COP 21 at 12:28 am on Sunday, 13 December.
ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties adopted the agenda (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/1) and agreed to the organization of work (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/1, FCCC/SBSTA/2015/3 and FCCC/SBI/2015/11).
The CMP referred to the SBSTA the item on clarification of the text in section G (Article 3, paragraph 7ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, and the sub-item on Protocol Article 2.3 (adverse effects of policies and measures).
The CMP referred to the SBI the items on: capacity building under the Kyoto Protocol; administrative, financial and institutional matters; reporting from and review of Annex I parties; as well as the sub-item on Protocol Article 3.14 (minimizing adverse effects).
Election of Replacement Officers: On Thursday, 10 December, the CMP elected the members and alternative members to the Adaptation Fund Board, JI Supervisory Committee (JISC), CDM Executive Board (EB), and Compliance Committee. CMP Vice-President Cheikh Ndiaye Sylla (Senegal) noted the COP Bureau members would also serve as CMP Bureau members. He also noted that the list of nominations is available on the UNFCCC website and urged parties to submit nominations for the remaining vacant positions by 29 January 2016.
Approval of the Report on Credentials: On Thursday, 10 December, the CMP adopted the report on credentials (FCCC/CP/2015/9 and FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/7), with the addition of the Cook Islands, Egypt, Fiji, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Haiti, Honduras, Kiribati, Nicaragua, Pakistan and Panama.
Status of Ratification of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol: On Wednesday, 2 December, the Secretariat reported that, as of 30 November, 55 instruments of acceptance of the 144 required had been received. The CMP took note of the information.
On Thursday, 10 December, CMP 11 Vice-President Sylla informed parties that, since the Secretariat’s statement on 2 December 2015, two additional instruments of ratification, from Argentina and Sri Lanka, had been received, bringing the total to 57. He reported 87 more are required to bring the amendment into force. The CMP took note of the information, urging all parties to ratify as soon as possible.
REPORTS OF THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES: On Thursday, 10 December, the CMP adopted the reports of SBI 42 and SBI 43 (FCCC/SBI/2015/10 and Add.1, and FCCC/SBI/2015/L.19), and the reports of SBSTA 42 and SBSTA 43 (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2 and Adds.1 and 2, and FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.15).
ISSUES RELATING TO THE CDM: On this item (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/5), on Thursday, 3 December, CDM EB Chair Lambert Schneider (Germany) noted that revisions to project standards, and validation and verification standards had been adopted with a view to streamlining the work of the CDM. He noted with concern the low demand and prices for CERs, and outlined ways in which the Board continues to encourage voluntary cancellation of CERs. Parties agreed to consider this item in a contact group, co-chaired by Karoliina Anttonen (Finland) and Jeffrey Spooner (Jamaica).
On Thursday, 10 December, the contact group focused on draft text produced during informal consultations on Tuesday evening, 8 December. After discussions on, among others, linkages between the CDM and the GCF, and the need for a workshop on international climate change financing institutions and the CDM, parties agreed to forward the draft decision to the CMP.
Final Outcome: It its decision (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.4), the CMP, inter alia:
ISSUES RELATING TO JI: On Thursday, 3 December, JISC Chair Julia Soto (Peru) reported that activity under JI has “virtually stopped,” saying that there are no new requests for projects or for instances of emissions reduction units. Parties agreed to establish a contact group, co-chaired by Dimitar Nikov (France) and Yaw Osafo (Ghana), on this item (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/4).
In the contact group, parties exchanged views on: the necessity of changes to rules of procedure of the JISC; providing a mandate for third-party review; revitalizing JI; exploring synergies with other market mechanisms; and requesting an analysis on the role of JI beyond 2020. Parties agreed that the Co-Chairs would prepare a draft decision for consideration.
On Monday, 7 December, Co-Chair Osafo presented the draft decision. After exchanging views on, among others, the difficult market situation of JI, revision of JI guidelines, and incorporation of views of stakeholders, parties decided to forward the draft decision to the CMP with amendments.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.1), the CMP:
REPORT OF THE COMPLIANCE COMMITTEE: This item was first considered on Wednesday, 2 December. Facilitative Branch Chair Delano Ruben Verwey (the Netherlands) outlined the activities of the Enforcement and Facilitative Branches, including the Committee’s continued interaction with expert review teams. The CMP took note of the report (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/3) and invited parties to contribute to the Trust Fund.
REPORT OF THE ADAPTATION FUND BOARD: This item (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/2) was first considered on Wednesday, 2 December. Adaptation Fund Board Chair Hans Olav Ibrekk (Norway) reported that the “fund has never been more in demand” and has delivered effectively on its mandate, but that the sustainability of the Fund is “in danger.” Parties established a contact group co-chaired by Richard Muyungi (Tanzania) and Herman Sips (the Netherlands).
On Sunday, 13 December, the COP adopted the report of the Adaptation Fund Board and a decision.
Final Outcome:In its decision (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.3/Rev.1), the CMP, inter alia:
REPORT ON THE HIGH-LEVEL MINISTERIAL ROUND TABLE ON INCREASED AMBITION OF KYOTO PROTOCOL COMMITMENTS: This item was first considered on Wednesday, 2 December. CMP Vice-President Sylla recalled there was no consensus on this issue at CMP 10 (FCCC/KP/CMP/2014/3). Saying that the high-level roundtable did not increase the ambition of Annex I parties, China, opposed by the EU, Australia and Norway, proposed a contact group. Parties agreed to informal consultations on a way forward facilitated by Paul Watkinson (France).
On Thursday, 10 December, CMP 11 Vice-President Sylla informed that parties were unable to reach consensus on this issue. The item will be included on the provisional agenda of CMP 12. The COP 21 Presidency will conduct intersessional consultations on the way forward.
REPORTING FROM AND REVIEW OF ANNEX I PARTIES: National Communications: These discussions are summarized under the SBI agenda item on the status of submission and review of the sixth NCs and first biennial reports from Annex I parties (see page 31).
Annual Compilation and Accounting Report from Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol: This item was first taken up on Tuesday, 1 December. Upon the recommendation of SBI 43, the CMP took note of the report (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/6 and Add.1/Rev.1).
CLARIFICATION OF THE TEXT IN SECTION G (ARTICLE 3.7TER) OF THE DOHA AMENDMENT TO THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBSTA (see page 41).
CAPACITY BUILDING UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 34).
MATTERS RELATING TO RESPONSE MEASURES: Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14: Discussions on these items are summarized under the SBI agenda item on the forum and work programme (see page 34). On Sunday, 13 December, CMP 11 President Fabius reported that parties were unable to conclude consideration of these items, and parties agreed to take note of this.
OTHER MATTERS REFERRED TO THE CMP BY THE SUBSIDIARY BODIES: Training Programme for Members of Expert Review Teams Participating in Annual Reviews under Protocol Article 8: On Thursday, 10 December, the CMP considered a draft decision forwarded by SBSTA 42 on this item. The CMP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/2/Add.2) the CMP, inter alia, requests the Secretariat to:
The annex to the decision contains an overview of the training programme for members of expert review teams, with one section on details of the training programme and another section on courses of the training programme, including descriptions of: national systems; application of adjustments; modalities for the accounting of assigned amounts under Article 7, paragraph 4; review of national registries and information on assigned amounts; and review of activities under Article 3, paragraphs 3 and 4, of the Kyoto Protocol.
Implications of the Implementation of Decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the Previous Decisions on Methodological Issues Relating to Protocol Articles 5, 7 and 8: The discussions on the two draft decisions under this item are summarized under the SBSTA (see page 38).
Annual Report on the Technical Review of GHG Inventories of Annex I Parties to the Convention, as Defined in Protocol Article 1.7: These discussions are summarized under the SBSTA (see page 42).
ADMINISTRATIVE, FINANCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL MATTERS: Audit Report and Financial Statements for 2014: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 36).
Budget Performance for the Biennium 2014-2015: These discussions are summarized under the SBI (see page 36).
Programme Budget for the Biennium 2016-2017: On Thursday, 10 December, the CMP adopted two decisions, forwarded by SBI 42, on the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017 and on the methodology for the collection of international transaction log (ITL) fees in the biennium 2016-2017.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1), on the programme budget for the biennium 2016-2017, the CMP, inter alia:
In its decision (FCCC/SBI/2015/10/Add.1), on the methodology for the collection of ITL fees in the biennium 2016-2017, the CMP, inter alia:
CONCLUSION OF THE SESSION: Adoption of the Report of CMP 11: Following presentation of the report of the session (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.2) by the Secretariat, on behalf of Rapporteur Johanna Lissinger Peitz (Sweden), the CMP adopted the report.
Closure of the Session: On resource implications of the decisions taken, UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary Richard Kinley noted the need for €325,000 to conduct the technical review of GHG inventories and initial reports of Annex 1 parties that are also parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
CMP 11 President Fabius invited, and parties agreed, to take note of the draft resolution presented by Morocco thanking France, as the host government, and the city of Paris (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.5).
CMP 11 President Fabius gaveled CMP 11 to a close at 12:33 am on Sunday, 13 December.
ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties adopted the agenda (FCCC/SBI/2015/11) with the item on information in non-Annex I national communications held in abeyance. Parties agreed to the organization of work as presented.
Election of Officers Other than the Chair: On Tuesday, 1 December, SBI Chair Yauvoli indicated that consultations on the election of officers other than the Chair would be conducted by the COP 21/CMP 11 Presidency.
On Friday, 4 December, SBI Chair Yauvoli said that consultations on the nomination of the SBI Vice-Chair had been concluded, but no nominations had been received for the SBI Rapporteur. The SBI agreed to nominate Zhihua Chen (China) as the SBI Vice-Chair and that Sidat Yaffa (The Gambia) shall remain in office until his replacement has been elected.
Reporting From and Review of Annex I Parties to the Convention: Status of Submission and Review of Sixth National Communications (NCs) and First Biennial Reports (BRs) from Annex I Parties to the Convention: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBI took note of the status of submission and review of sixth NCs and first BRs from Annex I parties (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.9).
Outcome of the First Round of the IAR Process (2014-2015): On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to conduct informal consultations, co-facilitated by Fatuma Mohamed Hussein (Kenya) and Helen Plume (New Zealand) on this item. On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.20), the SBI agrees to continue its consideration of the outcome of the first round of the IAR process at SBI 44.
Revision of the “Guidelines for the Preparation of National Communication by Parties Included in Annex I to the Convention Part II: UNFCCC Reporting Guidelines on National Communications”: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed that SBI Chair Yauvoli would prepare draft conclusions on this item (FCCC/TP/2015/3) in consultation with interested parties. On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.23), the SBI, inter alia, requests the Secretariat to organize a pre-sessional workshop, and prepare a report thereof, prior to SBI 44, under the guidance of the SBI Chair, in order to advance the discussion under this agenda sub-item, and agrees to continue its work on the revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on NCs at SBI 44 with a view to finalizing and recommending them for adoption by COP 22.
Report on National GHG Inventory Data from Annex I Parties to the Convention for the Period 1990-2013: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of the report on national GHG inventory data from Annex I parties for 1990-2013 (FCCC/SBI/2015/21).
Annual Compilation and Accounting Report for Annex B Parties under the Kyoto Protocol for 2015: This item was held in abeyance.
REPORTING FROM NON-ANNEX I PARTIES TO THE CONVENTION: Information Contained in National Communications from Non-Annex I Parties to the Convention: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBI recommended that the CMP take note of the annual compilation and accounting report for Annex B parties under the Kyoto Protocol for 2015 (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/6 and Add.1/Rev.1).
Work of the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Non-Annex I Parties to the Convention (CGE):  During the SBI opening plenary, parties agreed to conduct informal consultations, co-facilitated by Anne Rasmussen (Samoa) and Helen Plume (New Zealand), on this item (FCCC/SBI/2015/17, 18, 20 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.13). On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted its conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.21) the SBI, inter alia:
Provision of Financial and Technical Support: During the SBI opening plenary, parties agreed that SBI Chair Yauvoli would prepare draft conclusions on this item (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.15 and FCCC/CP/2015/4). On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted its conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.24), the SBI, inter alia:
Summary Reports on the Technical Analysis of BURs from Non-Annex I Parties to the Convention: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of summary reports on the technical analysis of BURs from non-Annex I parties.
MATTERS RELATED TO THE MECHANISMS UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: Review of the Modalities and Procedures for the CDM: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to informal consultations, co-facilitated by Jeffery Spooner (Jamaica) and Karoliina Anttonen (Finland), on this item. On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.28), the SBI agrees to continue its consideration of this matter at SBI 44.
Review of the JI Guidelines: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to conduct informal consultations, co-facilitated by Yaw Osafo (Ghana) and Dimitar Nikov (France), on this item. On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.30), the SBI agrees to continue its consideration of this issue at SBI 44 on the basis of a draft decision text proposed by the co-facilitators of the informal consultations, as contained in the annex to the document.
Modalities for Expediting the Continued Issuance, Transfer and Acquisition of JI Emission Reduction Units (ERUs): On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed that SBI Chair Yauvoli would prepare draft conclusions on this item. On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.25), the SBI agreed to conclude its consideration of this matter.
Report of the Administrator of the International Transaction Log (ITL) under the Kyoto Protocol: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of the report (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.12).
MATTERS RELATING TO LDCS: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties considered the report of the LEG (FCCC/SBI/2015/19 and Corr.1) and information on the NAP Expo (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.14). SBI agreed to conduct informal consultations, facilitated by Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso).
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.22), the SBI, inter alia,notes that 32 project proposals for the implementation of national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs) and for the process of NAPs, accounting for a total of US$235.7 million, had been technically cleared by the GEF, but were awaiting funding under the LDCF. The SBI noted with appreciation the continued collaboration of the LEG with the Adaptation Committee and other constituted bodies under the Convention, the NWP and a wide range of relevant organizations, agencies and regional centers, and requests the LEG to continue to enhance this engagement.
NATIONAL ADAPTATION PLANS: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBI considered the report of the LEG (FCCC/SBI/2015/19), GEF (FCCC/CP/2015/4), GCF (FCCC/CP/2015/3), Adaptation Committee (FCCC/SBI/2015/2), progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.11) and information on the NAP Expo (FCCC/SB/2015/INF.14). Parties agreed to conduct informal consultations, co-facilitated by Mamadou Honadia (Burkina Faso) and Jens Fugl (EU).
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to COP 21.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.32 and Add.1), the COP, inter alia, requests the SBI to assess progress in the process to formulate and implement NAPs at SBI 44.
The COP also decides that the following steps are necessary for the SBI to initiate the assessment:
REPORT OF THE ADAPTATION COMMITTEE: On Tuesday, 1 December, SBI considered the report of the Adaptation Committee (FCCC/SB/2015/2) and parties agreed to joint SBI/SBSTA informal consultations, co-facilitated by Malia Talakai (Nauru) and Anton Hilber (Switzerland).
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted the conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to the COP.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SB/2015/L.3), the COP, inter alia:
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE WIM: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBI considered the report of the WIM (FCCC/SB/2015/3) and parties agreed to discuss this issue in joint SBI/SBSTA informal consultations, co-facilitated by Beth Lavender (Canada) and Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago). On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted the conclusions and forwarded a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the COP.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SB/2015/L.5/Rev.1), the COP, inter alia:
DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TECHNOLOGY MECHANISM: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to conduct informal consultations on all sub-items under the TM (FCCC/SB/2015/1 and INF.3, FCCC/SBI/2015/16 and FCCC/CP/2015/4), co-facilitated by Carlos Fuller (Belize) and Elfriede More (Austria).
Joint Annual Report of the TEC and the CTCN: Friday, 4 December, the SBI and SBSTA adopted conclusions on this joint item and forwarded a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the COP.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SB/2015/L.4), the COP, inter alia:
Poznan Strategic Programme on Technology Transfer (PSP): On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.29), the SBI, inter alia, invites parties, the CTCN and relevant entities to act upon the recommendation provided in the TEC’s evaluation report of the PSP, and encourages the GEF to share midterm evaluations of PSP technology transfer and finance centers and pilot projects of the fourth replenishment of the GEF, and being informed by these lessons, invites the TEC to update its report for consideration by the COP no later than COP 23, through the SBI.
CAPACITY BUILDING: Capacity Building under the Convention: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to conduct informal back-to-back consultations with capacity building under the Kyoto Protocol, co-facilitated by Bubu Jallow (The Gambia) and Kunihiko Shimada (Japan), on this item (FCCC/SBI/2015/14 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.16).
On Friday, 4 December, several parties expressed willingness to further engage constructively on this item under the COP. The US, Australia and Japan raised concerns about the process by which the draft conclusions were reached. Swaziland, supported by The Gambia, noted the draft text “provides a landing ground and marks the beginning of defining capacity building.” The EU understood the need to strengthen capacity-building institutions under the Convention as “our common vision” and hoped for the establishment of a capacity-building committee as an outcome of COP 21. Senegal, for the LDCs, with the Philippines, thanked the EU for their positive spirit that had allowed capacity building to be taken up at a higher level. Burundi lamented that “the text is still bracketed” and emphasized capacity building as necessary for her country to adapt to climate change impacts.
The SBI adopted conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.33) and forwarded annexed draft decision text to the COP for further consideration.
The COP continued consideration of the draft decision text contained in the annex to the SBI conclusions. On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.6), the COP, inter alia:
Capacity Building under the Kyoto Protocol: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to conduct informal back-to-back consultations with capacity building under the Convention, co-facilitated by Bubu Jallow (The Gambia) and Kunihiko Shimada (Japan), on this item (FCCC/SBI/2015/14 and FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.16).
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions and forwarded on annexed draft decision text to CMP 11 for further consideration. CMP 11 continued consideration of the draft decision text contained in the annex to the SBI conclusions.
On Friday, 10 December, the CMP adopted a decision.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.34), the SBI notes it was unable to conclude its consideration of this agenda sub-item and recommends that CMP 11 continue consideration of this matter on the basis of draft decision text contained in the annex to the conclusions.
In its decision (FCCC/KP/CMP/2015/L.6), the CMP:
IMPACT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES: Forum and Work Programme: During the SBI opening plenary on Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to establish a joint SBI/SBSTA contact group, co-chaired by SBI Chair Yauvoli and SBSTA Chair Lidia Wojtal (Poland) on this item, including to address the agenda sub-items on matters relating to Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse impacts) and progress on the implementation of Decision 1/CP.10 (Buenos Aires Programme of Work).
The contact group first met on Wednesday, 2 December, co-facilitated by Delano Verwey (the Netherlands) and Eduardo Calvo (Peru), and considered draft decision text contained in the annex to document FCCC/SB/2015/L.2, as decided by SBI 42 and SBSTA 42.
 The US said the text needed further consideration and that, because of ongoing negotiations under the ADP, the US would not be “in a position to adopt the decision text.”
The EU noted that the text attempts to bridge different visions, but acknowledged the need to know how all discussions on this issue in Paris will come together. Argentina for the G-77/China, Ghana for the African Group, and Saudi Arabia expressed concern about linking this item to the ADP, with Singapore suggesting the draft decision should focus on pre-2020 measures. The EU said the pre-2020 focus is not indicated in the text. Parties agreed to continue discussions in informal consultations.
On Thursday, 3 December, the contact group agreed to forward to the COP the draft decision and draft conclusions prepared, on the basis of parties’ input, by the co-facilitators with the help of the Secretariat.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted its conclusions (FCCC/SB/2015/L.6) and forwarded the annexed draft decision text to the COP for further consideration.
On Sunday, 13 December, the COP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.12) the COP, inter alia:
Protocol Article 3.14: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI item on the impact of the implementation of response measures, sub-item on the forum and work programme (see page 34).
THE 2013-2015 REVIEW: This item was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBI Chair Yauvoli and SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed to, a joint SBI/SBSTA contact group, co-chaired by Gertraud Wollansky (Austria) and Leon Charles (Grenada), on this item. The contact group first met on Tuesday, 1 December.
Most parties called for substantive conclusions on this item and a draft COP decision. Elements of the draft conclusions and decision included: taking note of the report of the structured expert dialogue (SED) (FCCC/SB/2015/INF.1); mentioning the ten messages highlighted in the SED report; stating that the goal to hold global temperature rise below 2°C is inadequate; noting negative impacts are already being felt at current levels of warming; and that in consideration of overall progress towards the long-term global goal, parties should act urgently and ambitiously, while recognizing the technological, economic and institutional challenges. The draft decision also contained various options that would have the COP: reaffirm the 2°C limit; reaffirm the 2°C limit and recognize the need to strive to 1.5°C; or strengthen the long-term goal to 1.5°C.
Saudi Arabia and China preferred procedural conclusions, such as taking note of the report and thanking those experts involved. Since other parties did not want to adopt only procedural conclusions, arguing that such conclusions would not fulfill the mandate of the review, no conclusions were adopted and no draft decision was forwarded to the COP.
On Friday, 4 December, SBI Chair Yauvoli and SBSTA Chair Wojtal reported that parties had been unable to complete work on this matter. The SBI and SBSTA agreed that the SBI and SBSTA Chairs would seek the guidance of the COP 21 President on the matter.
On Saturday, 5 December, COP 21 President Fabius said the 2013-2015 review would be considered together with ambition and long-term goal during discussions on the Paris agreement, as the review could help inform parties in their consideration of temperature targets and agreement on ambition could unlock a final decision on the 2013-2015 review. The issue was not specifically addressed in the ministerial consultations, which focused on the agreement.
On Sunday, 13 December, the COP adopted a decision on this item.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/CP/2015/L.10), the COP, inter alia:
GENDER AND CLIMATE CHANGE: This item (FCCC/CP/2015/6 and FCCC/SBI/2015/12) was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBI Chair Yauvoli proposed, and parties agreed, that he prepare draft conclusions on this item.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome:In its conclusions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.31) the SBI, inter alia:
ADMINISTRATIVE, FINANCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL MATTERS: Budget Performance for the Biennium 2014-2015: On Tuesday, 1 December, noting the situation of outstanding contributions as pressing, UNFCCC Deputy Executive Secretary Richard Kinley presented the budget performance for the biennium 2014-2015 as at 30 June 2015 (FCCC/SBI/2015/13) and status of contributions as at 15 November 2015 (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.17). The SBI agreed that SBI Chair Yauvoli would draft conclusions in consultation with interested parties.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions and forwarded draft decisions, jointly with the sub-item on audit report and financial statements for 2014, to the COP and CMP.
Final Outcome: In their decisions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.26 and L.27), the CMP and COP:
Audit Report and Financial Statements for 2014: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of the audited financial statements for the year 2014 (FCCC/SBI/2015/INF.10). The SBI agreed that SBI Chair Yauvoli would draft conclusions in consultation with interested parties.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBI adopted conclusions and forwarded draft decisions, jointly with the sub-item on budget performance for the biennium 2014-2015, to the COP and CMP.
Final Outcome: In their decisions (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.26 and L.27), on the audit report and financial statements for 2014, the CMP and COP take note of the audit report of the UN Board of Auditors and urge the Executive Secretary to implement the recommendations of the auditors, as appropriate.
REPORT ON OTHER ACTIVITIES: Summary Report on the 3rd Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of the summary report on the 3rd Dialogue on Article 6 of the Convention (FCCC/SBI/2015/15). The SBI endorsed replacing “Article 6 of the Convention” with “Action for Climate Empowerment.”
CLOSURE AND REPORT ON THE SESSION: On Friday, 4 December, SBI Rapporteur Sidat Yaffa (The Gambia) presented, and the SBI adopted, the report of SBI 43 (FCCC/SBI/2015/L.19). SBI Chair Yauvoli thanked all delegates for their work and noted SBI 43 accomplished much work, including the completion of the first round of the IAR. SBI 43 was gaveled to a close at 9:23 pm.
SUBSIDIARY BODY FOR SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVICE 
ORGANIZATIONAL MATTERS: Parties adopted the agenda (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/3) and agreed to the organization of work.
Election of Officers other than the Chair: On Tuesday, 1 December, SBSTA Chair Wojtal reported that consultations on the election of officers other than the Chair would be coordinated by the COP 21/CMP 11 Presidency. 
On Friday, 4 December, SBSTA Chair Wojtal announced that Tibor Schaffhauser (Hungary) would serve as SBSTA Vice Chair and Aderito Santana (São Tomé and Príncipe) would serve as Rapporteur.
NAIROBI WORK PROGRAMME: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed that SBSTA Chair Wojtal would produce draft conclusions on this item (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/4 and INF.8).
The UN Environment Programme highlighted the progress of the Lima Adaptation Knowledge Initiative (LAKI) in various sub-regions and outlined its two aims, to identify and prioritize knowledge gaps at the sub-regional level and to fill those gaps. Botswana and Sri Lanka welcomed LAKI’s progress and future workshops.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted the conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions, the SBSTA (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.19), inter alia, notes with appreciation the reports provided on good practices and lessons learned in adaptation planning and progress on implementing activities under the NWP, and the information provided by LAKI, the Adaptation Committee and the LEG.
The SBSTA further welcomes the launch of the Adaptation Knowledge Portal and recognized its role in enhancing the dissemination of knowledge developed under the NWP, the Adaptation Committee and the WIM Executive Committee.
REPORT OF THE ADAPTATION COMMITTEE: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI (see page 33).
DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGIES AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TECHNOLOGY MECHANISM: Joint Annual Report of the TEC and the CTCN: On Tuesday, 1 December, TEC Chair Kunihiko Shimada (Japan) reported key achievements, including enhanced access to climate technology finance and support for development of national systems of innovation.
CTCN Advisory Board Chair Jukka Uosukainen (Finland) said the CTCN now has over 100 network members providing technical assistance in response to developing country requests.
Further discussions under this item are summarized under the SBI (see page 33).
ISSUES RELATING TO AGRICULTURE: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBSTA considered the report of the workshop on early warning systems and contingency plans in relation to extreme weather events (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.6) and the report on the assessment of risk and vulnerability of agricultural systems to different climate change scenarios (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.7).
Parties agreed to discuss this issue in informal consultations, co-facilitated by Emmanuel Dlamini (Swaziland) and Heikki Granholm (Finland). Informal consultations convened Wednesday, 2 December.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted the conclusions, with minor amendments.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.17), the SBSTA takes note of the reports and agreed to further consider reports and the additional issues already identified for workshops at SBSTA 44 and 45.
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE WIM: Discussions on this item are summarized under the SBI (see page 33).
MATTERS RELATING TO SCIENCE AND REVIEW: Research and Systematic Observation: This item was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed to, informal consultations, co-facilitated by Chris Moseki (South Africa) and Stefan Rösner (Germany).
The Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) reported on progress made against the implementation plan and the assessment of the adequacy of the global observing network.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) reported, inter alia, that the WMO Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS) developed a supplement to the technical guidelines for NAPs and that the WMO Congress adopted a policy on climate data and products for the GFCS.
The Committee on Earth Observation Satellites reported that, on sensing, data from the essential climate variable inventory were provided to complement the existing database, and highlighted progress on the implementation of carbon observation from space.
The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) underlined that ocean observation is integral to the climate observation system and highlighted challenges sustaining observations often supported by short-term research budgets.
Informal consultations were first held on Tuesday, 1 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome:In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.18), the SBSTA, inter alia:
The 2013-2015 Review: This item is summarized under the SBI (see page 35).
IMPACT OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF RESPONSE MEASURES: Forum and Work Programme: During the SBSTA opening plenary on Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed to establish a joint SBI/SBSTA contact group, co-chaired by SBSTA Chair Wojtal and SBI Chair Yauvoli. Discussions and outcomes on this item are summarized under the SBI (see page 34).
Matters Relating to Protocol Article 2.3 (adverse effects of policies and measures): This sub-item was considered jointly with the forum and work programme (see page 34).
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES UNDER THE CONVENTION: Methodologies for the Reporting of Financial Information by Annex I Parties to the Convention: This item was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed, to establish a contact group co-chaired by Hussein Alfa Nafo (Mali) and Roger Dungan (New Zealand).The contact group first met on Wednesday, 2 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted the conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to the COP. On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the decision.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.22), the SBSTA recommends a draft decision for consideration by COP 21. In its decision, the COP, inter alia:
GHG Data Interface: On Tuesday, 1 December, during the SBSTA opening plenary parties agreed to defer consideration of this item until SBSTA 44.
Emissions from Bunker Fuels: This item (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/MISC.5) was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed, that she prepare a draft decision on this item.
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) reported on efforts to improve fuel efficiency, encourage alternative fuels and more efficiently manage air traffic. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) reported agreement on a three-step approach to data collection and on technology cooperation and capacity-building efforts. Saudi Arabia, for the G-77/China, underscored the importance of multilateral solutions and supported working through the IMO and ICAO while respecting the principles of the Convention and avoiding unilateral measures. Argentina, for a number of developing countries, said that measures should not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade. She urged further technical analysis of a market-based mechanism proposed under ICAO and said such a mechanism could only be based on mutual and multilateral consent and, with China, should include CBDR. On the IMO, China expressed concern on the adoption of the European system to monitor CO2 emissions from ships in its ports. Japan, Singapore and the EU said the IMO and ICAO are the suitable places to address these issues. The Republic of Korea urged parties to work toward agreement in these organizations.
On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.16), the SBSTA takes note of the information received from and progress reported by ICAO and IMO on their ongoing work, notes the views expressed by parties, and invites ICAO and IMO to continue to report, at future sessions of the SBSTA, on relevant work on this issue.
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES UNDER THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: Implications of the Implementation of Decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the Previous Decisions on Methodological Issues to the Kyoto Protocol, Including Those Relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol: This item was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed to, a contact group, co-chaired by Anke Herold (Germany) and Guilherme do Prado Lima (Brazil), on this item. The contact group first met on Tuesday, 1 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to the CMP.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.27), the SBSTA recommends two draft decisions for consideration by CMP 11. In the decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.27/Add.1) regarding part I of the item, implications related to accounting and reporting and other related issues, the CMP, inter alia:
The CMP also decides that, for the purpose of the second commitment period, the following changes shall apply to Decisions 13/CMP.1 and 15/CMP.1:
The CMP also decides that:
The CMP adopts: the revisions to the modalities for the accounting of assigned amounts under Protocol Article 7.4 as set out in Annex I; the standard electronic format for reporting Kyoto Protocol units and the reporting instructions for the second commitment period contained in Annex II for reporting in accordance with paragraph 11 (information to be reported in standard electronic format) of the annex to decision 15/CMP.1; and the revisions to the “Guidelines for the Preparation of the Information Required under Article 7 of the Kyoto Protocol” for the second commitment period contained in Annex III.
The CMP also decides that each of the Annex I parties that have reached an agreement to fulfill its commitments under Protocol Article 3 jointly, in accordance with Protocol Article 4 (joint fulfillment), shall clarify in their reports, so as to facilitate the calculation of the assigned amount submitted pursuant to Decision 2/CMP.8, how the information listed in Annex I to that decision, the application of Article 3.7ter, including its technical implementation, and Chapter VI (continuation of ongoing activities into second commitment period) of Decision 1/CMP.8 are determined. Such clarification shall describe, in detail, methodologies and, if applicable, any relevant assumptions applied by those parties for their joint fulfillment in relation to:
The CMP decides that:
The CMP also:
In the decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.27/Add.2) regarding part II of the item, implications related to the review and adjustments and other related issues, the CMP, inter alia, decides that:
The COP also decides that for the purpose of the second commitment period, a list of reference changes shall apply to Decisions 18/CMP.1, 19/CMP.1, 20/CMP.1 and 22/CMP.1.
The CMP adopts the revisions to the “Guidelines for Review under Article 8 of the Kyoto Protocol” for the second commitment period contained in Annex I and the revisions to the “Good Practice Guidance and Adjustments under Article 5.2 (methodologies for estimating anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks) of the Kyoto Protocol” for the second commitment period set out in Annex II.
The CMP also:
Accounting, Reporting and Review Requirements for Annex I Parties without QELRCs for the Second Commitment Period: This item (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.10) was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. Parties established a contact group, co-chaired by Anke Herold (Germany) and Guilherme do Prado Lima (Brazil), on this item. The contact group first met on Tuesday, 1 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome:In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.28), the SBSTA agrees that its work under this agenda item has been completed, noting that the draft decisions contained in FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.27/Add.1 and Add. 2 for the agenda item above (on implications of the implementation of Decisions 2/CMP.7 to 4/CMP.7 and 1/CMP.8 on the previous decisions on methodological issues to the Kyoto Protocol, including those relating to Articles 5, 7 and 8 of the Kyoto Protocol) address these matters sufficiently.
Clarification of the Text in Section G (Article 3.7ter) of the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol: This item (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.11) was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed to, a contact group, co-chaired by Anke Herold (Germany) and Guilherme do Prado Lima (Brazil), on this item. The contact group first met on Tuesday, 1 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions and forwarded a draft decision for consideration and adoption by the CMP. 
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.29 and Add.1), the SBSTA recommends a draft decision for consideration by CMP 11. In its decision, the CMP:
LULUCF under Protocol Article 3.3 and 3.4, and under the CDM: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed that SBSTA Chair Wojtal would produce a draft decision on this item. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions.
Final Outcome: In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.20), the SBSTA takes note of the CDM Executive Board’s (CDM EB) assessment of the applicability of the modalities and procedures to project activities involving revegetation, contained in the 2015 report of the CDM EB and requests the Secretariat to organize a workshop on the issue at SBSTA 44.
MARKET AND NON-MARKET MECHANISMS UNDER THE CONVENTION: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties agreed that SBSTA Chair Wojtal would produce a draft decision on the three sub-items of this agenda item. On Friday, 4 December, SBSTAChair Wojtal reported that parties could not reach agreement on this issue for any of the sub-items: the framework for various approaches; non-market based approaches; and new market-based approaches. This item will be taken up at SBSTA 44.
REPORTS ON OTHER ACTIVITIES: On Tuesday, 1 December, parties took note of the Annual Report on the Technical Review of Information Reported under the Convention Related to Biennial Reports and NCs by Annex I Parties to the Convention (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.5) and the Report on the Implementation of Domestic Action by Annex I Parties, as defined in Protocol Article 1.7, based on information reported in their NCs (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.4).
Annual Report on the Technical Review of GHG Inventories from Annex I Parties to the Convention: This item (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.9) was first considered on Tuesday, 1 December. SBSTA Chair Wojtal proposed, and parties agreed to, informal consultations, co-facilitated by Riitta Pipatti (Finland) and Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe).
The informal consultations first convened on Tuesday, 1 December. On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted the draft conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to the COP. On Thursday, 10 December, the COP adopted the decision, with an amendment read out by SBSTA Chair Wojtal.
Final Outcome:In its conclusions (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.21 and Add.1), the SBSTA recommends a draft decision for consideration by COP 21. In its decision, the COP, inter alia:
Annual Report on the Technical Review of GHG Inventories and Other Information Reported by Annex I Parties, as Defined in Protocol Article 1.7: On Tuesday, 1 December, the SBSTA considered the report (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/INF.10/Rev.1) and agreed to informal consultations, co-facilitated by Riitta Pipatti (Finland) and Washington Zhakata (Zimbabwe). On Friday, 4 December, the SBSTA adopted conclusions and forwarded a draft decision to the CMP.
Final Outcome: In its decision (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.30 and Add.1), the CMP requests the Secretariat: to organize a review of the 2015 and 2016 GHG inventory submissions from Annex I parties; requests the Secretariat to organize a review of the reports to facilitate the calculation of the assigned amount for the second commitment period, striving to complete each review no later than one year after the submission date of the report; and to continue to make improvements to the CRF reporter functionality, prioritizing the resolution of outstanding issues related to transparency and accuracy. The CMP invites Annex I parties that have not yet submitted their 2015 GHG inventories and supplementary information to do so as soon as possible.
CLOSURE OF THE SESSION: On Friday, 4 December, SBSTA Rapporteur Stasile Znutiene (Lithuania) presented, and the SBSTA adopted, its report (FCCC/SBSTA/2015/L.15). Thanking everyone for their efforts during this intensive and brief SBSTA session, SBSTA Chair Wojtal gaveled the meeting to a close at 10:26 pm.
In Paris, we have seen many revolutions. 
The most beautiful, most peaceful revolution has been achieved, a climate revolution.
—François Hollande, President of France
The 2015 Paris Climate Change Conference was perhaps destined to succeed. After a bruising failure in Copenhagen in 2009 to produce a legally-binding agreement, many felt that Paris could not afford to fail. Yet there was also concern that the outcome would be watered-down or meaningless. In the end, the outcome of UNFCCC COP 21 exceeded expectations, producing an agreement that while perhaps not a revolution, is an important step in the evolution of climate governance and a reaffirmation of environmental multilateralism.
At COP 21, 195 countries gathered to complete the task they had set for themselves in Durban, in 2011, to complete a “protocol, another legal instrument or an agreed outcome with legal force under the Convention applicable to all parties.” This brief analysis explores the extent to which parties fulfilled this mandate, in terms of universal participation, but also in terms of the Paris Agreement’s ability to catalyze ambitious action by parties and action by a wide range of actors, which many cited as indispensable to address the climate crisis.
EVOLUTION AND REVOLUTION 
The Paris Agreement can be characterized as an evolution in climate governance, and a revolution in the UNFCCC COP process. At the center of the Paris Agreement are five-year cycles: each nationally determined contribution (NDC) cycle is to be more ambitious than the last and a global “stocktake” will inform collective efforts on mitigation, adaptation and support, and occur midway through the contribution cycle, every five years after 2023.
Through these cycles, parties are to “ratchet up” efforts to keep global temperature rise “well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.” To track progress, parties are bound to a transparency framework, which represents the legally-binding portion of the agreement, alongside an obligation to undertake and communicate their NDCs.
The Paris Agreement also anchors, strengthens and creates institutions and mechanisms, particularly for means of implementation. The decision supporting the Agreement identifies modalities to be created or established for several new mechanisms, such as the new Paris Committee for Capacity-building and the mitigation and sustainable development mechanism. The decision also requests SBSTA to develop new modalities to account for public climate finance.
As many pointed out during the COP closing plenary, the Paris Agreement, as a compromise, “is good, but not perfect.” The communication of NDCs is legally-binding, but their content and targets are not. The Agreement includes reference to loss and damage, and the Warsaw International Mechanism on Loss and Damage associated with Climate Change Impacts, as a distinct article from adaptation. This separation was a “win” for many small island developing states (SIDS), yet the explicit exclusion of liability and compensation in the decision was a disappointment to many, as the costs associated with loss and damage cannot be covered by risk insurance alone.
In the immediate term, developed countries are not bound by the Agreement to increase their mitigation or support efforts beyond existing commitments. As many lamented, the US$100 billion finance mobilization goal, set to be reached by developed countries in 2020, is “essentially extended in the decision through 2025,” after which time parties will have to negotiate a new collective goal, which some interpreted as including an expectation that some developing countries should participate in the mobilization.
The inclusion of human rights in the preamble of the agreement was celebrated by many, including Venezuela and Bolivia. This makes the Paris Agreement the first multilateral environmental agreement to recognize human rights. The preamble also includes concepts not traditionally considered “climate issues,” such as intergenerational equity, climate justice and the right to health. Yet the Agreement does not operationalize these rights throughout, which disappointed, in particular, gender advocates who pointed out that the final text omits references to gender responsiveness that were present in a number of sections in earlier drafts.
In terms of the broader development of global climate governance, the Agreement reflects an evolution of the “bottom-up” approach. The Paris Agreement can be described as a hybrid between a top-down, rules-based system and a bottom-up system of pledge and review. The NDCs “codify” the bottom-up approach that emerged from Copenhagen. Yet, many pointed to “vestiges” of a Kyoto Protocol-type, top-down system, in the form of the common rules for transparency and the compliance mechanism, although some noted that the compliance mechanism is “merely” facilitative in nature as it lacks an enforcement branch. In short, the procedural aspects of the Paris Agreement are legally-binding. Nevertheless, most substantive elements, including the specific goals of the NDCs that will be housed in a public registry maintained by the Secretariat, are not legally-binding.
The Agreement also represents an evolution in how parties address differentiation. The Agreement builds on the compromise in Lima, which drew from a 2014 US-China joint announcement on climate change, that adds the element of “in light of different national circumstances” to the end of the familiar CBDR and respective capabilities. It makes no explicit mention of the annexes of the Convention, the historic harbingers of differentiation, but only developed and developing countries, with subtle re-alignments in various sections. The NDCs represent, as US Secretary of State John Kerry called them, a “monument to differentiation”: each country determines its “fair contribution,” according to its respective capabilities and in light of its “different national circumstances.”
The transparency framework is, according to one observer “subtly trifurcated,” asking all to take legally-binding reporting requirements, with recognition of developing countries’ need for support, and a further recognition of the special capacity-building needs of SIDS and least developed countries. As insisted by many developing countries, the provision of support is more strictly bifurcated, as developed countries “shall provide financial resources,” while other countries are encouraged to “provide such support voluntarily.”
Achieving such an evolution in global governance requires nothing short of a procedural revolution. This was the major innovation of the French Presidency. Under the guidance of COP 21 President Laurent Fabius, COP 21 managed to uphold a highly-transparent and inclusive process for parties, which catered to the needs of individual states, while challenging parties to craft an agreement that was more substantive than many thought possible.
The French borrowed the indaba model from the Durban COP, and learned from Copenhagen that Heads of State and Government provide political guidance and should not negotiate text. In a process that started before the 2014 Lima COP, the French Presidency worked in partnership with the Peruvian Presidency, to convene several ministerial meetings “to get the ministers well-acquainted.”
On the margins of the meetings organized by the French Presidency, a group of approximately 15 “like-minded” ministers from different regions and groups was brought together by the Marshall Islands. These informal meetings formed the basis of what became known as the “High-Ambition Coalition.” This loose alliance, eventually representing up to 100 countries, rallied around a list of “ambitious asks,” such as a clear long-term goal and five-year review cycles, creating a show of solidarity that some said effectively marginalized those not in the group. Many noted that these ambitious asks eventually found their way into the Agreement.
Another procedural revolution by the Presidency was to keep the full responsibility for the text’s development on the parties’ shoulders. Ministers had to engage with the lengthy, heavily bracketed text parties had developed in the ADP contact group, and subsequent iterations released during the second week faithfully reflected parties’ consultations. By not dropping a surprise text late in the proceedings, the French Presidency ensured that the text was party-owned and parties understood they had the collective responsibility for its success or failure. Many parties had quietly speculated throughout the meeting that the Presidency had its own text, but regardless of its existence, one was never unveiled. This galvanized ministers to do the heavy lifting of sorting through options and brackets themselves.
The transparency of the process, as one delegate put it, drove the ambition of what parties could achieve; this time, there was no “easy out of rejecting the President’s text.” Above all, the French Presidency said it would, and did, listen. That every party praised the Presidency is not only a tribute to the French Presidency, but a recognition that they all believed their positions were heard.
A PARTICIPATORY OR AN AMBITIOUS EVOLUTION? 
Universal participation can come at the expense of ambition.  Oftentimes, bringing all on board can result in a watering down of the overall level of ambition. At first glance, this appears to be the case, leading some observers to reject the deal as “business as usual.” Contributions that are nationally-determined, however, became a “necessity” to achieve universal participation because no single set of rules or targets could accommodate the vastly different circumstances of 195 states. The current set of 189 intended NDCs, representing 95% of global emissions―which many lauded as a remarkable level of participation―put collective efforts only on a path to an approximately 3 °C temperature increase. For some, much of the success of the Paris Agreement will hinge on its ability to encourage parties to ratchet up their contributions to a sufficient level of ambition to safeguard the planet.
One way to increase ambition that many sought when they arrived in Paris was a legally-binding agreement. Yet specifying that an agreement is legally binding does not guarantee implementation and may reduce both ambition and participation. As Minister Vivian Balakrishnan of Singapore observed, “the Kyoto Protocol had the best of intentions,” yet was modest in its aims. It also lacked participation by key countries. While the NDCs represent significant participation, their non-legally binding character raised concerns over their low collective ambition.
Others viewed goal-setting as a way to increase the ambition of the agreement. The Agreement’s references to pursuing efforts to limit global average temperature rise to 1.5 °C, coupled with references to peaking emissions as soon as possible, and achieving a balance between anthropogenic emissions and removals by sinks, a phrase many believe refers to net-zero emissions, are significantly more ambitious than many expected before COP 21. These new goals have implications for governments. As one delegate observed, the intended NDCs submitted before COP 21 need to be re-evaluated in light of the goals articulated in the Paris Agreement. Some observers hoped this would inspire at least some countries to revise their intended NDCs into more ambitious NDCs.
The transparency framework and the global stocktake were described by some as the Agreement’s “mechanisms for ambition.” The dual obligation to report and take stock of mitigation, adaptation and support every five years creates a collective assessment of achievements and needed efforts. Reviewing the extent of support provided “places a microscope” on developed countries to provide adequate support to meet developing countries’ mitigation and adaptation ambitions. Many hoped this would also provide assurances to help some countries remove the conditionalities from the mitigation section of their INDCs.
For many developing countries, post-2020 ambition relies on pre-2020 ambition. The Paris Outcome includes the Durban Platform’s workstream 2, tasked to address the pre-2020 mitigation gap, in a number of ways. These include a strengthened technical examination process (TEP) on mitigation that strives to involve more developing country experts and other actors, and formalizes the role of the technology and financial mechanisms of the Convention in the process. Also a new TEP is established on adaptation, welcomed by many developing countries where adaptation is as important as mitigation. Some viewed these institutional links as potentially moving the TEPs beyond “talk shops” and into “solutions spaces” where technologies and practices for both mitigation and adaptation become globally disseminated.
In addition, a facilitative dialogue at COP 22 will assess progress in pre-2020 implementation, and a high-level event at each COP from 2016-2020 will build on the current and previous COP Presidencies’ Lima-Paris Action Agenda (LPAA) initiative. Whether these processes together can raise pre-2020 ambition will only be determined in the coming years. For many, the answer to unlocking pre-2020 ambition lies in the Convention’s ability to engage transnational and subnational actors.
CREATING A “CLIMATE REVOLUTION FOR ALL” 
As noted by COP 21 President Fabius, the success of the Paris conference would not only depend on a universal intergovernmental agreement. Action by state and non-state actors will ultimately determine whether Paris will go down in history as “the beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era,” as one country announced. The Paris Agreement could deliver in this area in three ways: through the agreement; by showcasing and mobilizing action by all actors; and by expanding the UNFCCC’s role in the fast-changing global implementation space.
At the Leaders Event on 30 November, numerous Heads of State and Government called for Paris to send strong long-term signals. UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called on Paris to send a clear message to markets that transition to a low-carbon, climate resilient global economy is “inevitable, beneficial and already under way.” Also, some countries called for the Agreement to provide assurances that climate finance would be available and scaled up post-2020, in particular for the most vulnerable.
The Paris Agreement indeed sends strong signals for climate action by all. The ambitious goals of the Agreement, five-year review cycles, and the transparency framework were welcomed by many as much-needed signals to markets to enable investments to be redirected to low-carbon and climate-resilient development. Some also pointed out that the universal nature of the agreement and near-universal coverage of intended NDCs alone send signals that opportunities for investments, innovation and technology development are opening up around the world. Article 6 on cooperative approaches and mechanisms was also praised for “having something for everyone” and giving carbon markets a much-needed, renewed basis for support, complete with demand for credits driven by countries’ progressively ambitious NDCs.
Another important goal set for COP 21 was to accelerate climate action by both state and non-state actors. In forming the LPAA in late 2014, the Peruvian and French COP Presidencies, together with the UN Secretary-General and the UNFCCC Secretariat, built on the momentum achieved by the September 2014 UN Climate Summit to bring non-state actors “inside the COP walls,” as described by COP 20 President Manuel Pulgar-Vidal.
Despite some concern that COP 21 would be a one-off tour de force of state and non-state actor commitments, many initiatives were launched or strengthened in Paris that will build momentum in the longer term. These include India’s International Solar Alliance involving more than 120 countries and the private investor-led US$2 billion Breakthrough Energy Coalition. Also, thousands of pledges of action and hundreds of billions of dollars in commitments to emission reductions and resilience measures were articulated through and alongside the LPAA, ranging from electrification in Africa to emission cuts in forest countries and climate risk insurance in SIDS.
Finally, many felt the Durban Platform, in particular its pre-2020 workstream, offered the UNFCCC a chance to reposition itself as the hub for global climate action. By Paris, this opportunity was seized at least three ways: the LPAA’s Non-State Actor Zone for Climate Action (NAZCA) portal and the public registry for NDCs, both maintained by the UNFCCC Secretariat, will serve as important focal points for aggregated information on climate plans, actions and support. The strengthened mitigation TEP, new adaptation TEP, and the LPAA-based high-level events, too, are likely to spur accelerated engagement with non-state actors within the UNFCCC space. Also, while the Paris outcome decision simply includes an invitation to non-party stakeholders to scale up their efforts and support actions, UNFCCC COPs have already managed to establish themselves firmly as the main annual “cross-fertilization space” for civil society, scientists, businesses and industry from all around the world to rally public attention, network and share best practices.
“VIVE L’UN, VIVE LA PLANETE, VIVE LA FRANCE” 
—François Hollande, President of France
Getting to an agreement was an arduous, lengthy task, and yet, as many recalled during the closing plenary “the work starts tomorrow.” Work to catalyze climate action before 2020 is pressing, and immediately lying ahead is the substantial technical and methodological work in order to prepare the many modalities to support the Paris Agreement for when it enters into force. It was not lost for many that the entry into force is not a foregone conclusion, given that 55 countries representing at least 55% of global emissions are required to ratify. Before 2020, many eyes will be on the major emitters whose ratification is necessary for the Paris Agreement to “come into effect and be implemented by 2020,” thereby completing the final leg of the Durban mandate.
During the COP 21 closing plenary, many lauded the Paris Agreement as an ambitious, fair and universal climate agreement, and many more celebrated the return to successful multilateral efforts to address climate change. Some observers viewed Paris as the culmination of a vital year for the UN development agenda, with the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including its Sustainable Development Goals, and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on financing for development, which together with the Paris Agreement on climate change can be said to provide a strong basis for multilateralism for the coming decade.
After years of doubt and indecision, the Paris Agreement represents renewed faith that multilateralism can address pressing challenges facing the international community. With its adoption on Saturday, 12 December 2015, most participants agreed with UNFCCC Executive Secretary Christiana Figueres that “we must, we can and we did.”
