Search the site
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL
Climate change is considered one of the most serious threats to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the environment, human health, food security, economic activity, natural resources and physical infrastructure. Scientists agree that rising concentrations of anthropogenically-produced greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of climate change have already been observed, and scientific findings indicate that precautionary and prompt action is necessary.
The international political response to climate change began with the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases to avoid “dangerous anthropogenic interference” with the climate system. Controlled gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now has 189 parties. The parties to the UNFCCC typically convene annually in a COP, and twice a year in meetings of the subsidiary bodies – the SBI and SBSTA.
Delegates built on the Marrakesh Accords at COP 8 and COP 9, elaborating on various technical rules and procedures. Parties also agreed on two new agenda items focused on adaptation and mitigation, and began informal negotiations on the complex and sensitive issue of how parties might engage on commitments to combat climate change in the post-2012 period. As a result of these discussions, a seminar was held in May 2005 that began to address some of the broader issues facing the climate change process.
INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
SECURITY COUNCIL SESSION ON CLIMATE CHANGE: On 17 April 2007, the UN Security Council discussed climate change for the first time. The meeting focused on the impact of climate change on peace and security. Over 50 participants spoke. Some delegates, including the G-77/China, raised doubts regarding the Council’s role on this issue, suggesting that it was primarily a socioeconomic and/or sustainable development issue that should be addressed by the General Assembly. However, many others, particularly small island states, welcomed the Council’s discussions. Many speakers urged the UN to give urgent consideration to holding a global summit on climate change. Participants also discussed the IPCC reports, the upcoming negotiations in Bali in late 2007, and the needs of the most vulnerable countries. The EU reiterated its recent unilateral commitment to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% by 2020 compared with 1990 levels, and to increase this to 30% if other developed countries took similar steps.
