Search the site
AWG CONTACT GROUP
In the afternoon, AWG Chair Charles opened the AWG contact group on the analysis of mitigation potential and possible ranges of emission reductions. Drawing attention to the draft conclusions distributed on Wednesday evening, he proposed to work through them paragraph by paragraph.
On introductory paragraphs of the draft conclusions referring to work carried out by AWG 3, submissions by parties and a technical paper by the Secretariat, delegates largely agreed but made editorial comments.
On a paragraph referring to Annex I domestic mitigation potential and national circumstances, NEW ZEALAND requested that sectoral differences should be further elaborated and SWITZERLAND suggested concretizing references to national circumstances. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION expressed concerns over the narrow scope implied by reference to domestic mitigation potential and emphasized the importance of international mitigation potential.
The EU proposed adding a new paragraph noting scientific evidence for the need to ensure that global emissions peak in the next ten to fifteen years and are reduced by 50% by 2050.
On a paragraph concerning the use of scientific information, the RUSSIAN FEDERATION and CANADA expressed concerns over wording indicating that the AWG agrees to an initial indicative range of Annex I emission reduction objectives. The G-77/CHINA emphasized that this formed the core of the paragraph and supported the inclusion of the initial indicative range. NORWAY stated that the reference to an initial indicative range was not problematic as such, but questioned its viability in light of changes proposed to another paragraph. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA emphasized that reference to Convention Article 2 deviates from the AWGs objective but NEW ZEALAND stressed the importance of retaining this reference if any ranges are to be included.
The EU, supported by SWITZERLAND, proposed deferring discussions on this issue and other items related to the AWGs work plan to COP 13. G-77/CHINA opposed this, questioning how the paragraph on submissions was related to the AWGs work plan. SAUDI ARABIA stressed that either all or no paragraphs should be deferred to COP 13. The EU indicated that requests for submissions inevitably related to the work plan. NORWAY stressed that being able to adopt conclusions on some issues in Vienna would save negotiating time at COP 13.
AWG Chair Charles informed delegations that he would continue working with parties informally and report to the AWG plenary on Friday morning if there is sufficient agreement, or reconvene in a contact group.
IN THE CORRIDORS
Informal negotiations on the AWG Chair's draft conclusions inched towards a resolution on a number of outstanding issues late on Thursday. At the top of the agenda was an attempt to agree on references to indicative ranges of Annex I emission reductions. Delegates seen in the corridors during a break-out session were said to be near consensus on a reference to the 'international context'. However, some Asian countries were reportedly still holding out when the group interrupted their deliberations to share a pizza in the corridors. Progress was also reported on a related paragraph on flexibile mechanisms, and in discussions on mitigation potential and national circumstances. Fears that the text would have to be packed for Bali accompanied by brackets faded with the day.
IN THE CORRIDORS II
