Search the site
The Fifth Conference of the Parties (COP-5) to the Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) will meet from 25 October - 5 November 1999 in Bonn, Germany. Approximately 4000 participants, including 80 - 100 ministers, are expected to attend. A high-level segment for ministers and heads of delegation will take place from 2 - 4 November. Delegates to COP-5 will work toward fulfilling the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) adopted at the Fourth Conference of the Parties (COP-4) in November 1998. Under the BAPA, Parties set a two-year deadline for strengthening FCCC implementation and preparing for the future entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol. The eleventh meeting of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA-11) will consider issues such as: guidelines for preparation of Annex I communications; development and transfer of technologies; and land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF). The Subsidiary Body for Implementation’s eleventh meeting (SBI-11) will consider issues such as non-Annex I communications, the financial mechanism and the programme budget for 2000 - 2001. SBI and SBSTA will jointly consider issues related to the Protocol’s cooperative mechanisms, compliance, capacity building and FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 (adverse effects).
RECENT MEETINGS
WORKSHOP ON IMPLEMENTATION OF FCCC ARTICLE 4, PARAGRAPHS 8 AND 9 (ADVERSE EFFECTS): COP-4 agreed on the programme of work outlined in the annex to decision 5/CP.4, including the organization of an expert workshop. Under the guidance of SBSTA Chair Kok Kee Chow and SBI Vice-Chair Mohammad Reza Salamat, this workshop was held from 21 - 24 September 1999 in Bonn. The subsidiary bodies will consider the outcome of the workshop and prepare a report including conclusions and/or a draft decision for COP-5, identifying initial actions to address the implementation of FCCC Articles 4.8 and 4.9 and Kyoto Protocol Articles 2.3 and 3.14 (adverse effects). The workshop included expert presentations followed by panel discussions addressing the policy-related implications of the information presented.
INFORMAL MINISTERIAL CONSULTATIONS: Informal ministerial consultations were held in Warsaw, Poland on 20 September 1999. Participants considered three questions: what needs to be accomplished at COP-6; what ministers should do at COP-5 to set the stage for a successful COP-6; and how Parties should proceed from COP-5 to COP-6. Participants supported maintaining or increasing the momentum of the negotiations through the next year. Many participants said a package was needed at COP-6 that would encourage ratification. A number of participants noted that if certain Parties do not ratify the Protocol, it would not come into effect. Participants generally agreed on the need for a balanced outcome, with resolution of both FCCC and Protocol issues. Some participants listed the cooperative mechanisms, compliance, sinks, and participation of a broader number of countries under the Protocol as key issues that need to be resolved.
Given the number and complexity of the outstanding issues, a number of participants preferred to hold COP-6 in early 2001. Some also noted that this would allow the COP to consider the IPCC Third Assessment Report. However, others expressed a preference for COP-6 to be held in the fall of 2000. COP-5 must decide on the date of COP-6.
A number of participants sought parallel progress on those key issues. Some called for flexibility and urged Parties not to set pre-conditions for agreement. A few participants urged Parties to focus on the BAPA rather than introduce new issues.
AOSIS WORKSHOP ON CLIMATE CHANGE AND THE CLEAN DEVELOPMENT MECHANISM OF THE KYOTO PROTOCOL: The Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) Workshop on the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) of the Protocol took place in Majuro, Republic of the Marshall Islands from 14 - 16 July 1999. The Workshop was organized and hosted by AOSIS and the Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. Over 50 participants attended, including country representatives from small island states, experts from various UN and regional organizations, an environmental NGO representative and special invitees from the Philippines, Mauritania, the US, the UK, Australia, Norway, New Zealand and Switzerland. Participants discussed elements of the CDM, including assessment of vulnerability and adaptation, use of renewable energy in the design of mitigation projects under the CDM, and capacity building for AOSIS member states.
THINGS TO LOOK FOR TODAY
PLENARY: The COP-5 opening Plenary is scheduled to begin at 10:00 am in the Maritim Room.
SBI: SBI is scheduled to begin at 3:00 pm.
SBSTA: SBSTA is scheduled to begin at 4:00 pm.
