Search the site
COP/MOP
Many parties, including the G-77/CHINA, EU and others, stressed the need for more equitable geographic distribution of CDM projects, particularly for Africa. ZAMBIA, TOGO, MALI, INDONESIA and others highlighted capacity building.
The EU urged building on the CDM’s recent growth through continuous improvements in the Board’s functioning, transparency in decision making, and shifting towards a more supervisory role. BRAZIL proposed an advisory group to support the Board.
BELARUS PROPOSAL: President Kibwana introduced the proposal from Belarus to amend Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol (FCCC/KP/CMP/2006/2). BELARUS underscored the importance of voluntary commitments and urged adoption of its proposal at COP/MOP 2. Thelma Krug (Brazil) will conduct informal consultations.
PROTOCOL ARTICLE 9 (REVIEW OF PROTOCOL): Many parties underscored the importance of IPCC’s AR4 and highlighted issues such as the CDM, adaptation, bunker fuels, technology transfer and LULUCF. South Africa, for the AFRICA GROUP, with INDIA, IRAN and others, supported a short and focused review. The UMBRELLA GROUP (except the US), the EU and SWITZERLAND supported a thorough review of all aspects of the Protocol and, opposed by CHINA, SAUDI ARABIA, INDIA, EGYPT and others, underscored linkages between the AWG and the review. JAPAN highlighted the “three tracks” (UNFCCC Dialogue, Article 9 review and AWG), while BRAZIL responded that there are only “two tracks” (Dialogue and AWG). SWITZERLAND, supported by the EU and NORWAY, proposed launching a process to conduct the review. BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA, and OMAN opposed this, noting that Article 9 refers to a review “at” COP/MOP 2.
The REPUBLIC of KOREA proposed holding a review every three years. ALGERIA, CHINA, IRAN, UAE and others said a review should not imply any new commitments for non-Annex I parties. ALGERIA suggested levying proceeds from JI and emissions trading. CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK urged mandating COP/MOP 3 to conclude negotiations by COP/MOP 4 and noted that non-Annex I countries will also need to cut emissions. Fernando Tudela Abad (Mexico) will conduct informal consultations.
CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS
DEFORESTATION: Co-Chair Rosland presented draft conclusions to the contact group. Having agreed on the need for a second workshop before SBSTA 26, discussion focused on its scope. The G-77/CHINA proposed focusing on policy approaches and positive incentives and, once these are refined, looking at relevant technical questions and data needs. JAPAN, and the UK speaking for the EU, stressed the importance of also addressing technical and methodological issues. The US emphasized clarity on technical issues and, with CANADA, expressed concern with a request that the Secretariat compile a background document on common elements and differences between possible approaches.
CAPACITY BUILDING (Convention): The groupfocused on monitoring capacity building and the GEF’s role under Decision 2/CP.7 (capacity building in developing countries). SWITZERLAND and the EU welcomed the GEF’s development of indicators to monitor capacity building and proposed that the Secretariat compile monitoring information for the COP. The EU reminded parties that it is very difficult to quantify the monetary contributions to capacity building and that the sustainability of capacity building is more important.
PROTOCOL: The contact group discussed whether it should consider the recommendations of the CDM Executive Board on capacity building, as suggested by the G-77/China. The EU, SWITZERLAND and JAPAN opposed this, stressing the need to focus on the current mandate, notably monitoring.
The Co-Chairs will prepare draft text for discussion on Friday.
AWG ISSUES: Chair Zammit Cutajar suggested an approach to a programme of work based on clusters of quantitative and qualitative issues and invited parties to respond. On a long-term goal, NORWAY called for agreement at COP/MOP 2 and the EU cited its target of stabilizing temperatures at 2°C. NORWAY cautioned that national mitigation potential should not be automatically translated into commitments, and encouraged a global perspective. The G-77/CHINA supported an approach beginning with assessment of mitigation potential for Annex I parties and relating this to a possible range of targets or ambition. CANADA called for an examination of policy tools, particularly LULUCF and, with JAPAN, for sectoral approaches. The EU said it would be insufficient to look at the potential for only a number of parties. He compared the Kyoto Protocol to a Nairobi “matatu” bus, when what is actually needed is a spacecraft. SAUDI ARABIA cautioned against moving away from the Protocol.
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER: In informal consultations, the Co-Chairs presented draft text that sought to integrate proposals from drafts submitted the previous day by the G-77/China and EU.
ADAPTATION PROGRAMME OF WORK: In informal consultations, progress was reported on both technical and substantive matters, as parties sought common language in the chapeau paragraphs and worked through technical details of the list of initial activities.
IN THE BREEZEWAYS
Long-term issues were the talk of the corridors Thursday. The first discussions under Protocol Article 9 were widely anticipated by some, given many people’s view of this as part of the “multi-track” process on long-term action. In the event, though, the discussion was viewed as “interesting, but not earth-shattering,” as parties generally reiterated their known positions. 
Unsurprisingly, the Russian proposal on voluntary commitments met staunch opposition from the G-77/China in plenary, even though some suggested that a number of developing countries may privately be somewhat sympathetic. “It’s not all over yet,” said one delegate.
In other developments, participants were starting to talk about Kofi Annan's visit to Nairobi to address next week’s high-level segment.
IN THE BREEZEWAYS II (FROM WASHINGTON TO NAIROBI)
Insiders are discussing the potential impact of the US mid-term elections both in Washington and here in Nairobi. The Democratic Party’s change in electoral fortunes seems to have “raised expectations massively” among the climate policy community, with a number of possibilities viewed on the horizon. Some expect that the passage of various climate-related bills may be accelerated through Congress, and there is even speculation about a real possibility that the new leadership on the Hill may opt to include climate change as a wedge issue in the next Presidential election. It is also expected by some that the political shakeup in Washington may end a “moratorium” on certain fields of study, which some claim has deprived legislators of important research. In Nairobi, observers will be watching for shifts in the US position in the discussions on the AWG, the Article 9 review and the Dialogue session.
