Search the site
WELCOMING CEREMONY
Josef Prll, Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, Environment and Water Management, Austria, emphasized that climate change is already a harsh reality and indicated that the EU is prepared to reduce emissions by 30% by 2020 provided that other industrialized countries take commitments and that economically advanced developing countries contribute adequately.
Maria Madalena Brito Neves, Minister of Agriculture and Environment, Cape Verde, emphasized small island developing states vulnerability to climate change, outlined adaptation and mitigation activities in Cape Verde and underscored the need for international cooperation.
Monyane Moleleki, Minister of Natural Resources, Lesotho, emphasized the need to begin post-2012 negotiations in Bali and indicated that while African countries need support, they also have responsibilities concerning climate change.
AWG
Maldives, for the LDCs, and Grenada, for the ALLIANCE OF SMALL ISLAND STATES (AOSIS), challenged a scenario projecting GHG concentrations of between 445-490 parts per million (ppm) and a change in global mean temperature above pre-industrial levels of between 2-2.4C. AOSIS said the avoidance of climate change impacts in small island states should be a benchmark for the post-2012 agreement.
INDONESIA called for real progress on analysis on mitigation potential and ranges of emissions reductions. She also outlined plans for COP 13, including parallel meetings by finance and trade ministers.
The EU emphasized that the paper confirms the urgency and scale of the necessary mitigation efforts, also showing that mitigation is technically and economically feasible. NORWAY outlined a recent analysis on ways of achieving Norways national emission targets, which include becoming carbon neutral by 2050.
The REPUBLIC OF KOREA identified reduction potential and costs as the deciding factors in determining targets and suggested presentations from relevant international institutions such as Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). The RUSSIAN FEDERATION and BELARUS emphasized that different economic circumstances must be taken into account when deciding on targets. ICELAND stressed sectoral mitigation potential and different national circumstances.
CONVENTION DIALOGUE
NEW ZEALAND identified deforestation and technology as possible elements. UGANDA called for a formal and binding instrument on technology, ICELAND emphasized climate friendly technologies as a way to meet emission reductions without halting economic growth, and MALDIVES called for modern cleaner technologies. The REPUBLIC OF KOREA stressed the importance of private sector participation, financing, technology transfer and capacity building.
ARGENTINA mentioned the expense of mitigation measures, specifically for agriculture. INDIA highlighted developing countries need to increase their energy use and stressed economic development as the best form of adaptation. CHINA underscored the need to enhance the implementation of the Convention.
CAN INTERNATIONAL reminded delegates of the high expectations for Bali from general public and business.
IN THE CORRIDORS
