Search the site
SBI
CONTACT GROUPS AND INFORMAL CONSULTATIONS
BUDGET: In the budget contact group, the Secretariat presented three budget scenarios for parties to consider: a reduction scenario adjusted for real growth using a projected inflation rate of 1.65%; a reduction scenario of US$1 million; and a reduction scenario of US$1.755 million. The Secretariat explained that all three proposals entailed reducing the UNFCCC’s contribution to the IPCC by 100%, but clarified that this would not have an impact on the UNFCCC Secretariat’s work programme. SOUTH AFRICA made reference to the degree of uncertainty with regard to forward budgeting, since the parties had not agreed on future tasks and activities of the Secretariat. Chair Dovland pointed out that parties also had the option of accepting the original budget proposal, which proposed a 3.3% increase. A draft decision was circulated for consideration.
Delegates reconvened for informal consultations in the afternoon, with parties exchanging further views on budget levels and various budget lines. While developing countries generally favored the Secretariat’s original budget proposal, some developed countries proposed a lower overall budget, and suggested various possible areas for savings. Discussions will continue in a contact group on Friday.
DEFORESTATION:  Discussions on reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries continued in a small drafting group, facilitated by Greg Picker (Australia). The drafting group met to consider the first ten operative paragraphs of SBSTA Chair Kumarsingh’s draft COP decision addressing,  inter alia, capacity building and project activities. The drafting group is expected to continue its work on Friday morning based on draft text from the facilitator.
In the afternoon the contact group reconvened, with delegates considering draft conclusions related to the 2006 Guidelines. BRAZIL, supported by CHINA, proposed deleting reference to the evolution process of the IPCC 2006 Guidelines, and the US, supported by a number of other parties, suggested a footnote to the overview chapter on IPCC guidelines. The RUSSIAN FEDERATION questioned proposals from the EU and others to change the order of the paragraphs.
The US queried language indicating that the UNFCCC reporting guidelines need to be revised before a decision is made on how to use the 2006 Guidelines. The EU proposed wording on voluntary use of the 2006 Guidelines “ensuring consistency with” the UNFCCC reporting guidelines, while BRAZIL suggested that the two guidelines should be applied in parallel in certain sectors. He emphasized that even though this means extra work, experience on the 2006 Guidelines is necessary before deciding on their use.
GHANA then proposed adjourning the meeting to allow the G-77/China time to coordinate, but the Co-Chairs suggested hearing comments on the other paragraphs first. On the remaining text, BRAZIL proposed language on managed lands, the EU suggested inviting the IPCC and other relevant organization to continue their efforts, and the US sought to bracket a paragraph on capacity building for the use of the 2006 Guidelines. Revised text will be prepared and informal consultations are set to continue on Friday afternoon.
NON-ANNEX I NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS: Delegates continued informal discussions on two draft SBI conclusions, one on the work of the Consultative Group of Experts (CGE) on non-Annex I communications, and another on the provision of financial and technical support. Bracketed text remained in both drafts concerning financing and the CGE’s technical reports. New text will be prepared and a contact group is planned for Saturday.
RESEARCH AND SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATION: Informal consultations were held in the morning. Co-Chair Fida introduced draft conclusions addressing SBSTA’s role in facilitating a more effective dialogue between parties and regional and international climate change research programmes. The draft included language on the IPCC, the informal meeting held on 8 May, SBSTA’s role, developing countries’ research capacity, key uncertainties and future research needs, the Global Terrestrial Observing System (GTOS), and the Nairobi Work Programme on Impacts, Vulnerability and Adaptation.
Parties discussed the text paragraph-by-paragraph, suggesting a range of alterations, additions and deletions. One developed country proposed deleting reference to the Nairobi Work Programme and a sentence that specified a number of approaches (such as side events, special events, workshops and submissions) that could be employed as part of a future dialogue. However, a developing country opposed deleting this sentence, preferring to retain these specific ideas.
Other developing countries sought to add text on capacity building, the need for financial support and the development of research capacity, while a developed country proposed adding a reference to identifying “gaps” in research. A revised text incorporating input from delegates will be circulated on Friday.
Parties agreed that the two options reflected the range of views, and restated their positions, with some indicating that it was too early and that a revision was appropriate in the context of discussions on the second commitment period, while others emphasized that current experience was sufficient to allow for such a revision to begin..
The Co-Chairs proposed to proceed by requesting focused submissions from parties on the implications of changing the limit, including on baselines, leakage, and the Protocol’s environmental integrity. Parties welcomed the proposal, but differences remained on whether to address the issue at COP/MOP 3 or 4, and whether submissions should also be requested from organizations. 
Revised draft conclusions will be presented on Friday afternoon ahead of another informal group meeting.
Parties then began discussing the proposed Annex II, which deals with the constituted bodies’ terms of reference. By the end of the morning session, participants had agreed to the body’s objective.
In the afternoon, the contact group reconvened. Co-Chairs Mahlung and Shimada introduced revised text, noting the progress made so far. Ghana, for the G-77/CHINA, requested time to consider the text, and the meeting was adjourned. “Informal informal” consultations continued in a small-group, though, with the Co-Chairs clarifying parties’ views on the preambular paragraphs.
Informal consultations are scheduled to resume on Friday, with the contact group possibly reconvening on Saturday.
IN THE CORRIDORS
