Search the site
At SB 24, the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) will take up such issues as national communications, financial and administrative matters, capacity building, and amendment of the Protocol in relation to the compliance mechanism. The Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) will consider a range of issues, including the five-year work programme on adaptation, mitigation, technology transfer, reducing emissions from deforestation in developing countries, and a range of methodological issues under both the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. Both SBI and SBSTA are expected to produce a number of draft decisions to be forwarded to COP 12 and COP/MOP 2, which will take place in November 2006 in Nairobi, Kenya.
In addition to the regular SB 24 sessions, the UNFCCC Dialogue and the Ad Hoc Working Group, one other pre-sessional meeting and three in-session workshops are scheduled. The Expert Meeting on Economic Diversification is being held from 16-17 May, while workshops are taking place on carbon capture and storage (20 May), carbon capture as a Clean Development Mechanism activity (22 May), and mitigation in relation to agriculture, forestry and rural development (23 May). Furthermore, over 40 “side events” have been scheduled on a range of climate change topics.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNFCCC AND THE KYOTO PROTOCOL 
Climate change is considered to be one of the most serious threats to sustainable development, with adverse impacts expected on the environment, human health, food security, economic activity, natural resources and physical infrastructure. Global climate varies naturally, but scientists agree that rising concentrations of anthropogenically-produced greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere are leading to changes in the climate. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the effects of climate change have already been observed, and scientific findings indicate that precautionary and prompt action is necessary.
The international political response to climate change began with the adoption of the UNFCCC in 1992. The UNFCCC sets out a framework for action aimed at stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases to avoid “dangerous anthropogenic interference” with the climate system. Controlled gases include methane, nitrous oxide and, in particular, carbon dioxide. The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994, and now has 189 parties. The parties to the UNFCCC typically convene annually in a Conference of the Parties (COP), and twice a year in meetings of the subsidiary bodies – the Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI) and the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA).
COP 10: At COP 10 in Buenos Aires in December 2004, delegates agreed on the Buenos Aires Programme of Work on Adaptation and Response Measures. Parties also took decisions on technology transfer, LULUCF, the UNFCCC’s financial mechanism, and education, training and public awareness. However, some issues remained unresolved, including items on the LDC Fund, the SCCF, and Protocol Article 2.3 (adverse effects of policies and measures). Meanwhile, lengthy negotiations were held on the complex and sensitive issue of how parties might engage on commitments to combat climate change in the post-2012 period. The Kyoto Protocol requires parties to begin considering the post-2012 period by 2005. Delegates agreed to hold a Seminar of Governmental Experts prior to the 22nd sessions of the Subsidiary Bodies (SB 22) in May 2005, although the terms of reference for the Seminar did not refer specifically to the post-2012 period or new commitments.
SEMINAR OF GOVERNMENTAL EXPERTS AND SB 22: This seminar took place in May 2005, in Bonn. Delegates started to address some of the broader issues facing the climate change process, including a future framework and commitments beyond 2012. Immediately following the seminar, SB 22 convened, focusing on preparations for COP 11 and COP/MOP 1, and addressing a variety of issues ranging from budget matters to adaptation and mitigation.
COP 11 addressed issues such as capacity building, technology development and transfer, the adverse effects of climate change on developing and least developed countries, and several financial and budget-related issues, including guidelines to the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which serves as the Convention’s financial mechanism. After lengthy negotiations, the COP also agreed on a process to consider future action under the UNFCCC.
INTERSESSIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
UNFCCC MEETINGS: Various UNFCCC events have been held since COP 11 and COP/MOP 1, including meetings of the CDM Executive Board (22-23 February and 10-12 May, Bonn), Joint Implementation Supervisory Committee (2-3 February and 8-11 March, Bonn), Compliance Committee (1-3 March, Bonn) and Expert Group on Technology Transfer (9-11 March, Brussels). In addition, there have been workshops on the Adaptation Fund (3-5 May, Edmonton, Canada), the five year adaptation work programme (13-15 March, Vienna), and a number of other technical and regional meetings events, including a regional workshop on adaptation for Latin America (18-20 April, Lima).
COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: During2006 and 2007, the UN Commission on Sustainable Development is focusing on four key issues: energy for sustainable development, industrial development, air pollution and the atmosphere, and climate change. At the Commission’s fourteenth session, held in New York from 1-12 May, delegates launched a review of these issues, facilitated by expert panels, discussions on regional implementation, a multistakeholder dialogue and a high-level segment. Ministers engaged in dialogue sessions with business leaders, heads of UN agencies and international financial organizations, and Major Groups, focusing on barriers and constraints and providing guidance on the priority areas to be taken up at the CSD-15 policy session and at the preceding Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting in early 2007.
CSD-14 was dominated by the energy agenda, with discussions focusing on energy security, the impact of oil and gas prices, and the respective roles of renewable energy technologies and fossil fuels, which, as delegates were informed repeatedly by oil-producing countries, will play a dominant role in the world’s energy mix for the foreseeable future. The non-negotiating format of this “review” session helped to disguise simmering tensions over the future of fossil fuels, nuclear power and the climate regime post-2012.
