Summary report, 6–10 September 2017
46th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-46)
Report PDF Jump to analysis
The 46th session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC-46) convened from 6-10 September 2017, in Montreal, Canada, and brought together approximately 320 participants from over 107 countries. IPCC-46 approved the chapter outlines for the three Working Group (WG) reports that will comprise the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6), together with the Synthesis Report (SYR). The WGs, which also met in Montreal, reached agreement on the chapter outlines before they were presented to the IPCC plenary for approval.
The Panel also received an update on the progress of the Ad Hoc Task Group on Financial Stability (ATG-Finance), discussed various funding options for the IPCC, and agreed to extend the Group’s mandate and to return to the issue of funding at IPCC-47.
The Panel also: agreed to admit 12 new observer organizations, heard a report of the Conflict of Interest Committee; heard a report on the future of the Task Group on Data and Scenario Support for Impact and Climate Analysis (TGICA); and agreed to establish a task group on aligning the IPCC cycles and the global stocktake under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); and agreed to convene an expert meeting on short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs). The Panel also heard progress reports on, inter alia: communication and outreach activities, the IPCC Scholarship Programme, and the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C.
Due to time constraints, the Panel agreed to discuss developing country participation in IPCC activities and matters related to the UNFCCC and other international bodies at IPCC-47. The Panel also agreed to convene IPCC-47 in Paris, France, during the first half of 2018.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE IPCC
The IPCC was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess, on a comprehensive, objective, open and transparent basis, the scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant to understanding human-induced climate change, its potential impacts, and options for adaptation and mitigation. The IPCC is an intergovernmental and scientific body with 195 member countries. It does not undertake new research, nor does it monitor climate-related data. Instead, it conducts assessments of the state of climate change knowledge on the basis of published and peer-reviewed scientific and technical literature. IPCC reports are intended to be policy relevant but not policy prescriptive.
The IPCC has three WGs: Working Group I (WGI) addresses the physical science basis of climate change; Working Group II (WGII) addresses climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability; and Working Group III (WGIII) addresses options for limiting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and mitigating climate change. Each WG has two Co-Chairs and six Vice-Chairs. The Co-Chairs guide the WGs in fulfilling the mandates given to them by the Panel and are assisted in this task by Technical Support Units (TSUs).
The IPCC also has a Task Force on National GHG Inventories (TFI) to oversee the IPCC National GHG Inventories Programme, also supported by a TSU. The Programme aims to develop and refine an internationally-agreed methodology and software for the calculation and reporting of national GHG emissions and removals, and encourage its use by parties to the UNFCCC.
The Panel elects its Bureau for the duration of a full assessment cycle, which lasts between five and seven years and includes the preparation of an IPCC assessment report. The Bureau plans, coordinates and monitors the IPCC’s work, and is composed of climate change experts representing all regions. Currently, the Bureau comprises 34 members, and includes the IPCC Chair and Vice-Chairs, the WG Co-Chairs and Vice-Chairs, and the TFI Co-Chairs. In 2011, the IPCC established an Executive Committee (ExComm) to assist with intersessional work and coordination among the WGs. The IPCC Secretariat is located in Geneva, Switzerland, and is hosted by the WMO.
IPCC PRODUCTS: Since its inception, the IPCC has prepared a series of comprehensive assessment reports, special reports (SRs) and technical papers that provide scientific information on climate change to the international community.
The IPCC’s First Assessment Report was completed in 1990; the Second Assessment Report in 1995; the Third Assessment Report in 2001; the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) in 2007; and the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) in 2014. Currently, the assessment reports are structured in three parts, one for each WG. Each WG’s contribution comprises a Summary for Policymakers (SPM), a Technical Summary and an underlying assessment report. All sections of each report undergo an exhaustive and intensive review process by experts and governments, which takes place in three stages: a first review by experts; a second review by experts and governments; and a third review by governments. Each SPM is then approved line by line by the respective WG. A SYR is produced for the assessment report as a whole, which integrates the most relevant aspects of the three WG reports and SRs, and a SPM of the SYR is then approved line by line by the Panel.
The IPCC also produces SRs, methodology reports and technical papers, focusing on specific issues related to climate change. Thus far, SRs include: Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (2000); Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage (2005); Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation (2011); and Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (2011). Technical papers have also been prepared on, among other things, Climate Change and Water (2008).
In addition, the IPCC produces methodology reports, which provide guidelines to assist countries in reporting on GHGs. Good Practice Guidance reports were approved by the Panel in 2000 and 2003, and the latest version of the IPCC Guidelines on National GHG Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines) was approved in 2006. The IPCC also adopted the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Wetlands (Wetlands Supplement), and the 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol (KP Supplement).
For its work and efforts “to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about manmade climate change, and to lay the foundations needed to counteract such change,” the IPCC was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, jointly with former United States Vice President Al Gore, in December 2007.
INTERACADEMY COUNCIL (IAC) REVIEW: In response to public criticism of the IPCC related to inaccuracies in AR4 and the Panel’s response to the criticism, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and then IPCC Chair Rajendra Pachauri requested the IAC to conduct an independent review of IPCC processes and procedures and to present recommendations to strengthen the IPCC and to ensure the quality of its reports.
The IAC presented its results in a report in August 2010 and made recommendations regarding, inter alia: the IPCC’s management structure; a communications strategy, including a plan to respond to crises; transparency, including criteria for selecting participants and the type of scientific and technical information to be assessed; and consistency in how the WGs characterize uncertainty. The Panel adopted a number of IAC-related decisions on the treatment of gray literature and uncertainty, and on a process to address errors in previous reports. It also established task groups on processes and procedures, communications, Conflict of Interest (COI) Policy, and governance and management.
AR5: WGI’s contribution to AR5 (Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis) was approved during IPCC-36 in September 2013 in Stockholm, Sweden. WGII’s contribution (Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability) was approved during IPCC-38 in March 2014 in Yokohama, Japan. The WGIII contribution to AR5 (Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change) was approved during IPCC-39 in April 2014 in Berlin, Germany. During IPCC-40 (27 October – 1 November 2014, Copenhagen, Denmark), the Panel approved the SYR’s SPM line by line, and adopted the longer SYR section by section. IPCC-37, in October 2013, in Batumi, Georgia, adopted two methodology reports, the Wetlands Supplement and KP Supplement; and undertook initial discussions on mapping the IPCC’s future.
IPCC-41: This meeting (24-27 February 2015, Nairobi, Kenya) addressed future IPCC work, and took a decision on the size, structure and composition of the IPCC Bureau and TFI Bureau (TFB). The Panel also adopted a number of decisions relevant to the AR6 cycle.
IPCC-42: This meeting (5-8 October 2015, Dubrovnik, Croatia) elected members of the IPCC Bureau and the TFB. The Panel elected Hoesung Lee (Republic of Korea) as IPCC Chair for the sixth assessment cycle.
IPCC-43: During this session (11-13 April 2016, Nairobi, Kenya), the Panel agreed to undertake three SRs in the AR6 cycle on: the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above preindustrial levels and related global GHG emission pathways (SR15); climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security and GHG fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems (SRCCL); and climate change and oceans and the cryosphere (SROCC). The Panel also agreed that a SR on cities would be prepared as part of the seventh assessment cycle.
IPCC-44: During this session (17-21 October 2016, Bangkok, Thailand), the Panel adopted the outlines of: SR15; and the Methodology Report to refine the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. The IPCC also adopted decisions on, inter alia: the Expert Meeting on Mitigation, Sustainability and Climate Stabilization Scenarios; communications and the scoping process; the future of the TGICA; review of the IPCC communications strategy; and a workshop on climate change and cities.
IPCC-45: This meeting (28-31 March, Guadalajara, Mexico) approved the SRCCL and SROCC outlines. IPCC-45 also discussed, inter alia; the Strategic Planning Schedule for the AR6; a proposal to consider SLCFs; and programme and budget, including options for resourcing. The Panel also decided to create the ATG-Finance and agreed to its terms of reference.
AR6 SCOPING MEETING: This meeting took place from 1-5 May 2017 in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, to draft chapter outlines for the three WG contributions to the AR6 for presentation to IPCC-46, and discuss issues related to the SYR. Over 200 experts from approximately 60 countries participated.
IPCC-46 REPORT
On Wednesday, 6 September, IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee opened the session, noting the importance of this meeting in the AR6 cycle. He commented on the timely progress of the SRs, noting the expert review of the first order draft of SR15 is underway, and that the first draft of the refinement of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines is expected by the end of the year. He emphasized the importance of financial support for the IPCC to carry out its work, communicate its findings, and demonstrate commitment to climate resilient development pathways.
In a ceremonial blessing to the meeting, Chief Christine Zachary-Deom, Mohawk Council of Kahnawà:ke, welcomed participants to Montreal and, in line with Mohawk tradition, thanked various elements in nature, as well as the creators, whoever they are.
Martine Dubuc, Associate Deputy Minister of Environment and Climate Change, Canada, welcomed participants and emphasized that Canada is relying on scientists to deliver cutting-edge knowledge to support national efforts to implement the Paris Agreement and other national sustainable development plans.
David Grimes, WMO President, underscored the WMO’s contribution to the IPCC’s work and the mutual benefits resulting from the active involvement of WMO scientists and member countries’ hydrological and weather services, especially those from developing countries.
Elena Manaenkova, WMO Deputy Secretary-General, noted the outsize role that national meteorological services play in the IPCC, and underscored the WMO’s commitment to support the IPCC’s activities at all stages of the AR6 cycle.
Jian Liu, UN Environment Chief Scientist, stressed the importance of bringing science to policymakers and commended the IPCC for its “bold and courageous” work in this regard. He called attention to a joint event planned for the 23rd session of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP 23) later this year that will encourage countries to be more supportive of the IPCC both politically and financially.
Addressing the plenary via video, Catherine McKenna, Canadian Minister of Environment and Climate Change, highlighted the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, and underscored the importance of the IPCC’s work to realize countries’ objectives under the Paris Agreement.
Also via video presentation, Kirsty Duncan, Canadian Minister of Science, emphasized Canada’s commitment and support for science and research on climate change, and noted the importance of bringing the international community together to address such a vital global challenge.
Youssef Nassef, Director of Adaptation, UNFCCC Secretariat, discussed areas where the IPCC’s contributions add value to the UNFCCC’s work, including policy. He highlighted opportunities for the IPCC to engage with the UNFCCC regarding: alignment of the IPCC and the global stocktake cycles; Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs); the enhanced transparency framework; and the 2018 facilitative dialogue.
Saudi Arabia lamented the absence of members of their delegation due to their inability to obtain visas and underscored the right to express reservations regarding meeting outcomes until such time as his country’s experts could contribute. He requested that his statement be reflected in the record of the meeting, to which the Panel agreed. At Saudi Arabia’s request, IPCC Secretary Abdalah Mokssit promised to deliver a written report on the visa issue, saying that the Secretariat plans to communicate more proactively with immigration authorities in the future to facilitate the visa process.
IPCC Chair Lee then introduced the provisional agenda (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.1 and Add.1). Norway, Switzerland, the UK, Germany, Finland, France, the Netherlands, Mexico, Belgium, Spain, Luxembourg, New Zealand and others requested that a verbal report from the side event on enhancing gender balance in the IPCC, which took place on Tuesday, 5 September, be presented under the agenda item, “Any Other Business.” Saudi Arabia opposed, noting the need to confer with his capital regarding any new agenda items. New Zealand said that the issue could be added to a future session agenda if substantive discussions were required, and Finland requested a written report from the gender meeting to facilitate information sharing for those who were not present. IPCC Chair Lee suggested hearing the verbal report on gender balance during the WG reports.
The Panel then adopted the agenda as presented, as well as the draft report of IPCC-45 (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.5).
IPCC TRUST FUND PROGRAMME AND BUDGET
Budget for 2018, 2019, 2020: On Wednesday, the Secretariat introduced the agenda sub-item (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.2) on income and expenditure for 2017 and on the budget until 2020. The Financial Task Team (FiTT) was asked to undertake discussions and report back to plenary.
On Sunday, FiTT Co-Chair Helen Plume presented the outcome of the group’s discussions, as well as a draft decision and a proposed 2018 budget. She noted that the budget will likely be insufficient for 2018 given standard costs calculation, but that rapidly declining reserves underscore the urgent need for the IPCC to find “more stable footing,” especially in light of the AR6 work programme. The Panel adopted the decision and the budget as presented.
Final Decision: In its decision (IPCC-XLVI-1), the Panel, inter alia: thanks those who contribute to the budget; urges governments to maintain and preferably increase their contributions, and provide multi-year contributions; notes with grave concern that the level of contributions to the IPCC Trust Fund received and pledged to date are insufficient to implement the work programme for 2018; and notes that the 2017 funding gap of CHF 1.8 million needs to be filled.
Resource Mobilization: IPCC Secretary Mokssit presented an information document on resource mobilization activities carried out for AR6 (IPCC-XLVI/INF.9), noting the gravity of the situation and calling on all member states to address the need for a financial plan and to consider participating in fundraising. He reported on reductions in airfare costs due to early travel arrangements and noted that all meetings until 2019 will be hosted without drawing from the IPCC’s budget.
Several countries announced their support for the IPCC Trust Fund. The UK, Norway and Japan announced their intention to expand their financial contributions. The European Union (EU) noted its plan to substantially increase its contribution in the coming years, including with a EUR 1.7 million grant by the end of 2017 and a EUR 4 million grant in the next three years, all in addition to individual EU members’ contributions. The Netherlands announced its intention to double its contribution to a total of EUR 100,000. Norway said it expects to increase its contribution in 2018 to more than double the amount of past years. Mali explained that its contribution will be made via the WMO. Australia announced its 2018 contribution will be at the same rate as in previous years, and that it will host a Lead Author meeting on inventory guidelines in April 2018. The Republic of Korea noted its multi-year contribution commitment and offered to host an IPCC plenary in 2018. Canada announced a doubling of its annual contribution of CAD 150,000 until 2022.
Poland suggested skipping IPCC sessions that are not essential to the AR6 cycle.
Audit of 2016 Financial Statements: The Secretariat presented the audit of the 2016 financial statements (IPCC-XLVI/INF.1). The Panel took note of the document.
Any Other Matters: The Secretariat presented the budget preparation process (IPCC-XLVI/INF.2). The Panel took note of the document.
Jonathan Lynn, Head, Communications and Media Relations, IPCC Secretariat, presented the communication and outreach strategy for the SRs in the AR6 cycle (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.4).
Germany, supported by Norway and Luxembourg, emphasized the importance of ensuring the SR15 SPM, at a minimum, and, optimally, the full SR15 report be made available in multiple languages ahead of UNFCCC COP 24 in 2018.
Germany, Sweden and Switzerland remarked on the gap between funding needs and budgeted activities, recommending solutions including non-travel meeting options, leaving IPCC derivative materials out of the budget, and conducting a budget efficiency review. Mexico suggested developing strategic partnerships with academic institutions to enhance communications and outreach activities, while Finland suggested ensuring the clearest possible language in the original AR6 products to reduce the need for those activities in the first place. Lynn explained that efforts are already underway to ensure report language is understandable to non-specialists, and that the Secretariat is looking into additional funding options for outreach and communications.
AD HOC TASK GROUP ON FINANCIAL STABILITY
On Saturday morning, ATG-Finance Co-Chair Thelma Krug presented the Group’s report (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.8) and noted documents outlining the pros and cons for potential funding options (IPCC-XLVI/INF.12) and comments from Task Group members (IPCC-XLVI/INF.14). She recalled that the ATG-Finance was established at IPCC-45 to explore avenues for sustainable and adequate funding, noted that contributions to the IPCC have been steadily declining, and said annual contributions have not exceeded CHF 4.4 million over the past few years. She explained that in 2017, to date, income has totaled CHF 1.9 million in-hand contributions, and pledges have totaled CHF 1.8 million, which means that the IPCC’s reserves of approximately CHF 6 million could be exhausted by the end of 2017.
ATG-Finance Co-Chair Youba Sokona presented eight possible funding options for consideration: maintaining voluntary and assessed contributions; increasing voluntary contributions; assessed or mandatory contributions from governments; crowdfunding from the public; contributions from scientific, research and philanthropic institutions; contributions from UN entities and international financial institutions; private sector contributions; and a “funding” meeting supported by good will.
IPCC Chair Lee recalled the ATG-Finance mandates to: explore options for increasing member country contributions, mobilizing additional resources, including from the UN and other organizations; and providing guidance on the eligibility of potential donors, including the private sector. He asked governments to take a decision on the various options presented in order to reverse the trend of declining contributions.
All countries underscored the importance of ensuring the independence and integrity of IPCC, and the urgency of the financial situation. They also stressed that as an intergovernmental organization, the main source of funding for the IPCC must come from governments and that the number of member countries providing contributions should be increased.
Regarding the options presented by the ATG-Finance, the US, South Africa, Saudi Arabia and others supported voluntary contributions, with Japan and others highlighting the value of in-kind contributions. In contrast, Mali, Bolivia and Benin preferred mandatory contributions.
Mexico, Canada, Kenya and many others proposed exploring options besides government contributions, with Germany and others stressing the need to develop eligibility criteria if this option were to be pursued. The Netherlands suggested a separate fund for other sources of funding.
The UK, Belgium and others were open to exploring contributions from UN entities and international and regional financial institutions. Australia expressed disappointment that annual cash contributions from the WMO and UN Environment (UNEP) had not always materialized, and, with China, Morocco and others, called for engaging the IPCC’s two parent organizations in this regard.
Mexico, supported by Italy, Belgium and others, proposed approaching the Green Climate Fund (GCF) for funding. Co-Chairs Krug and Sokona noted the Global Environment Facility has contributed to the IPCC in the past. However, they underscored the need to ascertain whether the rules governing other institutions allow for such contributions.
Belgium, Kenya, South Africa, Greece, Brazil and others suggested exploring contributions from scientific, research and philanthropic institutions as needed so long as conflict of interest is avoided. Belgium drew attention to substantial funds received by the UNFCCC from Bloomberg Philanthropies and suggested the IPCC learn more about this. Italy noted that research communities are often stressed for funding, while Future Earth suggested exploring other options since diverting resources from scientific research would ultimately weaken the IPCC.
Hungary, Poland and Brazil, opposed by Germany and Mali, suggested considering crowdfunding. Italy pointed out that properly undertaking this option requires particular skills and could be costly. Togo suggested the possibility of having users pay for some IPCC products. The US, supported by Switzerland, urged caution regarding the perception of IPCC products being sponsored by particular organizations.
IPCC Chair Lee then asked for views on whether the Panel should continue to be government funded only or whether it should pivot and adopt a hybrid approach with outside financial contributions.
Austria, Switzerland, the Bahamas, Peru, Saudi Arabia and others preferred that governments continue to be the sole financial contributors to the IPCC. Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Switzerland and Morocco suggested a fundraising campaign to align with the IPCC’s 30th Anniversary in 2018.
Nicaragua, South Africa, Zambia, Argentina, Chile and Bolivia preferred adopting a hybrid-financing approach. Bolivia said that soliciting contributions from all levels of government could be a potential interim solution. Zambia and Argentina favored a hybrid approach in order to ensure “fallback positions” if and when budgetary constraints require the pursuit of other funding sources. In a similar vein, the Netherlands and Germany requested a funding timeline to ensure “Plan B” options could be drawn on to ensure the continuation of indispensable activities if the IPCC is unable to extricate itself from its financial troubles.
The US, France, Mali, Mexico, Finland, the Maldives and others expressed openness to a hybrid financing approach, with caveats. Many participants requested more specificity on the budget to: determine budget shortfalls; have a clear picture of income and expenses; and determine what would be acceptable to have other organizations pay for.
Many countries supported extending the mandate of the ATG-Finance to continue to assess various funding options before taking a formal decision on whether or not to adopt a hybrid approach. IPCC Chair Lee assured delegates that fundraising efforts would continue in earnest in the interim. The Group then agreed to extend the mandate of the ATG-Finance and to revisit the funding issue at IPCC-47.
SCOPING OF THE IPCC SIXTH ASSESSMENT REPORT
Following presentations of the WG report chapter outlines to the IPCC plenary by the respective WG Co-Chairs, the WGs convened from Thursday to Sunday to discuss and agree on their report outlines. Revised versions of the text were presented throughout the week, and informal consultations took place as needed on the more contentious issues. WGI agreed on its chapter outline on Friday, while WGII and WGIII concluded their work on Sunday morning. The agreed WG report outlines were forwarded to the IPCC plenary for adoption.
During the WG sessions, a number of issues were raised regarding coherence and consistency among the WGs. In addition, some participants supported creating a dedicated group to ensure coherence across all WGs, with Spain adding that such a group should focus on cross-cutting issues, language and metrics used to measure progress, and a common glossary. A number of participants also called for accessible technical and executive summaries, and stand-alone high-level headline statements.
The plenary and WG discussions of the respective report outlines are summarized below.
WORKING GROUP I, AR6 REPORT OUTLINE: Presentation to the Plenary: On Wednesday, WGI Co-Chair Valérie Masson-Delmotte presented the WGI outline to the Panel as a significant evolution from the AR4 and AR5 reports, given developments in, inter alia, climate science, better understanding of climate systems and events, and integration of new evidence, such as observations, statistics, theory, and modeling. She noted enhanced exchange of information across the three WGs in this cycle, including on risk assessment and management, and in the preparation of the three SRs.
Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte provided an overview of the report’s structure, which addresses three themes: large-scale climate change; global climate processes, including a new comprehensive chapter on SLCFs; and regional climate information. She noted that groups of chapters follow a more holistic approach than in previous assessments, presenting current research approaches and scientific advances to ensure coherence.
Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte explained that the report would address extreme events in multiple chapters, given their relevance for risk assessment and management. She also noted that the chapters on global climate processes are linked to WGIII, while chapters on regional climate information are linked to WGII. She expressed WGI’s willingness to support other WGs on cross-chapter needs. She said the AR6 scoping meeting had recommended: an expert meeting to address cross-WG treatment of regional issues, and noted the need for financial support in this regard; developing a regional risk atlas, which would require a new team with authors from each WG; and a cross-WG scenario team to be active throughout the AR6 process.
WGI-13 Chapter Outline Discussions: On Thursday morning, WGI Co-Chair Panmao Zhai opened the 13th plenary session of WGI. WGI Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte encouraged diversity in author nominations for the WGI report, including in expertise, career stage, region and gender. IPCC Chair Lee said that WGI is the foundation for IPCC reports, emphasizing the importance of robust science to inform policy. WGI approved the agenda as presented (WG-I:13th/Doc.1 and WG-I:13th/Doc.1, Add.1, Rev.1).
Delegates then proceeded to make general comments on the chapter outline (WG-I:13th/Doc.2). Germany called for a maximum report length of 800 pages and inclusion of low-probability, high-impact events. China urged consistency by all WGs on the use of scenarios, with Senegal requesting that the treatment of risk and scenarios be consistent across WGs.
Climate Action Network (CAN), supported by the Republic of Korea and the Friends World Committee for Consultation (FWCC), expressed concern regarding the inclusion of geoengineering solutions. Sudan, supported by the US, cautioned against duplication of research in the WGI report and the SRs. Germany, with Ireland, Norway, and the US, urged coherence across all chapters and clear communication of complex scientific concepts from the report’s outset.
Saudi Arabia said the WGI outline puts too much emphasis on social science and policy-related issues, supported limiting the use of new terminology, and requested a stand-alone chapter on uncertainties. The US requested more explicit treatment of uncertainty regarding multi-model assessments, model downscaling and carbon budgets.
A number of delegates welcomed the regional focus in Chapters 10-12. Citing cross-WG report consistency, Japan encouraged using WGI downscaling results in WGII, which was not done in AR5.
Framing, context and methods (Chapter 1): Mali requested including a brief summary of the results of the first five ARs and to do so in each WG report. Saint Lucia, the Russian Federation and Saudi Arabia requested clarity regarding the report’s role in the global stocktake and said its contribution should be scientific in nature. Switzerland requested moving reference to the carbon budget from the chapter on biogeochemical cycles and feedbacks (Chapter 5) to this chapter. Saudi Arabia opposed, proposing to delete all references to the carbon budget.
On Friday morning, the WGI Co-Chairs presented the revised chapter outline, highlighting a new bullet point on treatment and evaluation of uncertainty throughout the report. With this addition, the chapter was agreed.
Changing state of the climate system (Chapter 2): This chapter was agreed on Friday without amendment.
Human influence on the climate system (Chapter 3): This chapter was agreed on Friday without amendment.
Future global climate: scenario-based projections and near-term information (Chapter 4): On Thursday, Saint Lucia, supported by Ireland, Norway, the EU, Belgium, the UK, Bolivia, Zambia and others, opposed conflating separate geoengineering concepts, noting that while GHG removal is a policy response included in the Paris Agreement, solar radiation management is not. CAN underscored that geoengineering options are not realistic response strategies at this time. The Russian Federation, Senegal and Saudi Arabia pointed to scientific literature on geoengineering solutions that should be included.
On Friday morning, the WGI Co-Chairs presented a revised outline, which included two separate bullet points on GHG removal and on solar radiation management. With these changes, the chapter outline was agreed.
Global carbon, and other biogeochemical cycles and feedbacks (Chapter 5): On Thursday, Saudi Arabia and Singapore disagreed with the reference to carbon budgets in the proposed draft. Japan and Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte clarified that carbon budget in this context refers to a scientific global assessment resulting from new literature. The Russian Federation proposed referring to “global” carbon. Japan, backed by the UK and others, supported consideration of abrupt changes and irreversibility post-2100, which Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte confirmed would be done.
On Friday, the Group discussed the revised chapter outline, with Belgium raising concern about use of the word “global” in the revised title due to the regional aspects of the carbon cycle, and, supported by Luxembourg, suggested referring to the importance of regional aspects in the recommendations for authors, which was agreed. Following a concern expressed by Norway, an additional recommendation for authors on ensuring differentiation between natural and anthropogenic changes was agreed.
Norway also asked for clarification on whether a bullet point on biogeochemical land management considered coastal areas like blue carbon. Mexico and Saudi Arabia supported its inclusion in the chapter, and the Co-Chairs suggested including it as an example at the end of the bullet point. This was opposed by Ireland, Germany, Spain, Norway and the UK, who noted this would give the issue of blue carbon too much prominence, and instead proposed a consideration of blue carbon in the guidance for authors. Norway suggested changing the same bullet point to reference “land and coastal management mitigation.” The Group agreed to the chapter with these suggestions.
Short-lived climate forcers (Chapter 6): On Thursday, Ireland and Mali welcomed the inclusion of this chapter as per their request. China underscored the need for a clear connection in the treatment of air quality and climate change. Belgium and Future Earth called for inclusion of sulfates when addressing SLCFs, with Belgium asking that WGII and WGIII consider SLCFs as a cross-cutting issue affecting climate change impacts and mitigation. India questioned this standalone chapter on SLCFs, as well as the reference to air quality, which was in the original formulation of the title, noting this is outside the IPCC’s scope and gives too much prominence to the issue, and pointing to other SLCF connections, such as glaciers and monsoons.
On Friday, delegates discussed the revised chapter outline, India said he could not accept maintaining reference to air quality in the chapter title, and stressed the importance of differentiating between lifespans of SLCFs, noting the temperature contribution of SLCFs is highly uncertain.
Following another revision of the chapter, and informal consultations, the Co-Chairs proposed to shorten the title to “SLCFs” and add a new bullet point on connections to air quality. India proposed adding reference to atmospheric compositions. With these revisions, the chapter was agreed.
The Earth’s energy budget, climate feedbacks, and climate sensitivity (Chapter 7): This chapter outline was agreed without comment.
Water cycle changes (Chapter 8): On Thursday, Saudi Arabia requested treating clouds and aerosols as a stand-alone chapter, as was done in AR5. Friday’s revised outline included a reference to cloud-aerosol processes in the bullet point on circulation, processes and phenomena affecting moisture and precipitation patterns. With that change, the chapter outline was agreed.
Ocean, cryosphere, and sea level change (Chapter 9): This chapter outline was agreed without discussion.
Linking global to regional climate change (Chapter 10): Saint Lucia suggested adding reference to regional challenges in the bullet point on evaluation of methods including downscaling and bias adjustment. Following the addition of language to reflect these proposals, the chapter was agreed.
Weather and climate extreme events (Chapter 11): On Thursday, El Salvador, supported by Nicaragua, called for reference to the specific circumstances of Central America as a particularly sensitive tropical area at the intersection of two ocean systems. The Philippines called for including reference to tropical cyclones, while Mali requested reference to drought. With the addition of reference to droughts and tropical cyclones, the chapter outline was agreed.
Climate change information for regional impact and risk assessment (Chapter 12): This chapter outline was agreed without amendment.
On Friday morning, WGI Co-Chair Zhai said the next WGI meeting will convene in April 2021 at a location to be determined. He noted that a joint WG session to approve and accept SR15 is scheduled for October 2018. Norway expressed concern that the timing of the joint session might be inadequate for completion and distribution of SR15 ahead of COP 24 in November 2018. He closed the WGI session at approximately 12:30 pm.
Report to the IPCC Plenary: On Sunday afternoon during the IPCC plenary, WGI Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte presented the WGI report outline as agreed during the WG session, and stressed the importance of governments supporting gender-diverse and multiple author nominations. Echoing this sentiment, Canada delivered an oral report on the session on enhancing gender balance in the IPCC that took place on Tuesday, 5 September, noting a written report will be available on the IPCC website. She said that a consultation for a gender action plan would take place in October 2017 in Ottawa.
Poland lamented the lack of scientists from Eastern Europe and stressed the importance of intra-regional balance. The Russian Federation suggested turning to the WMO to bring in scientists from national meteorological services in order to increase diversity. Morocco and others expressed concern about the author selection process, which often leaves developing country authors out.
Belgium called for limiting the length of the SPM to no more than 10 pages, to ensure a clear and concise message, with Co-Chair Masson-Delmotte responding that flexibility is required for such a long report. She estimated 20-25 pages for the SPM, with 10 figures. Norway and WGII Co-Chair Hans-Otto Pörtner suggested that the discussion regarding page length take place at a later date, noting that the WGs have not yet had the opportunity to coordinate on the matter.
The US proposed text for inclusion in the decisions on the all three WG report outlines clarifying that the bullets are indicative and that authors should follow IPCC guidelines regarding the scientific literature covered. Venezuela requested that this be included in the report of the plenary but not in the WG outlines. Belgium, supported by Germany and Luxembourg, expressed concern that referring specifically to literature related to the physical science aspects could affect WGI’s ability to fully participate on cross-cutting issues. Following further discussion and clarification, the Panel agreed to include, in each WG decision, text reflecting that the report “assesses relevant literature, especially since AR5, in a manner consistent with IPCC guidance on the use of literature.”
Final Decision: In the final decision (IPCC-XLVI/Doc.11), the Panel: agrees to the outline of the WGI contribution to AR6; invites the WG Co-Chairs to develop appropriate mechanisms to ensure the effective coordination of the WGs work, oversee the treatment of cross-cutting themes, and prepare a common glossary for the three WGs. The decision also sets out a timetable for the production of the WGI report, and states that the budget for the WG’s work is contained in the decision on the IPCC Trust Fund Programme and Budget (IPCC/XLVI-1).
The outline contains reference to a SPM, a Technical Summary, and a number of annexes, including on options for cross-WG integration, a regional atlas, and the cross-WG glossary. The outline includes chapters on:
framing, context and methods;
changing state of the climate system;
human influence on the climate system;
future global climate: scenario-based projections and near-term information;
global carbon and other biogeochemical cycles and feedbacks;
SLCFs;
the Earth’s energy budget, climate feedbacks, and climate sensitivity;
water cycle changes;
ocean, cryosphere and sea level change;
linking global to regional climate change;
weather and climate extreme events in a changing climate; and
climate change information for regional impact and for risk assessment.
WORKING GROUP II, AR6 REPORT OUTLINE: Presentation to the Plenary: WGII Co-Chairs Hans-Otto Pörtner and Debra Roberts presented the proposed outline for the WGII report to plenary on Wednesday, noting its overarching story line, which goes from natural to human systems and regions, to synthetic approaches. They pointed to three overarching themes in the report: theme one, on risks, adaptation and sustainability for systems impacted by climate change; theme two, on the different regions; and theme three, on sustainable development pathways, integrating adaptation and mitigation. They explained that the WGII outline also includes cross-chapter boxes that complement information available in the report.
WGII-II Chapter Outline Discussions: On Thursday afternoon, WGII Co-Chair Pörtner opened the 11th plenary session of WGII. IPCC Chair Lee commended the outline for its integrated consideration of risk, adaptation, mitigation, and development. The Group approved the agenda (WG-II:11th/Doc.1 and WG-II:11th/Doc.1, Add.1, Rev.1​).
Regarding general comments on the outline (WG-II:11th/Doc.2), Japan requested addressing the social cost of carbon in the sectoral chapters, while Saudi Arabia requested deleting reference to the social cost of carbon from the WGII outline altogether. Norway proposed considering WGII’s contribution to the global stocktake more broadly, and supported greater focus on ecosystem services, nature-based solutions and ecological shifts, and their linkages to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Canada, supported by Bolivia, Ecuador, Norway, Venezuela, Indonesia and Future Earth, proposed developing guidelines for including indigenous and local knowledge in AR6 products. Canada recommended convening an expert meeting with indigenous leaders and offered support for such a meeting. Switzerland suggested the IPCC could leapfrog on the approach used by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) in this regard.
Trinidad and Tobago, Saint Lucia, Mali, Tanzania, Grenada, the Bahamas, the Maldives, Venezuela and Zimbabwe called for reference to loss and damage in the outline, noting the issue’s relevance for policymakers. Bolivia, Chile and Ecuador supported including it either as a separate chapter or as a bullet point within each chapter. The US stressed the need to approach loss and damage from a scientific perspective and to avoid unclear and/or political definitions. A breakout group was established to further address loss and damage.
Bolivia and Singapore supported including reference to the concept of equity throughout the report.
Recalling problems in the AR5 related to the lack of data on Africa, Mali, supported by Tanzania, South Africa and Zimbabwe, underscored the need to address data gaps for Africa in the AR6, and called for the use of grey literature in this regard.
The US stressed adequate consideration of natural climate variability, feedbacks and drivers other than climate change, and the consistent treatment of uncertainty, noting that the sources and quantification of uncertainty should be explicitly addressed within each chapter.
Saudi Arabia opined that the outline was too mitigation-centric, and suggested that “trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation” should be replaced with “adaptation and mitigation co-benefits.” He noted the lack of an agreed definition for incremental or transformational adaptation, and pointed to economic diversification as a core part of sustainable development and climate change response.
Multiple countries proposed the addition of new chapters. Canada, supported by Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Chile, Norway and the US, suggested that polar regions be treated in a standalone chapter. Saudi Arabia proposed separate chapters on desertification and on uncertainties. India suggested three new chapters on: adaptation planning and implementation at national and subnational levels; international cooperation for adaptation; and, supported by Norway and the Maldives, climate risks to the economy, including the tourism and insurance sectors. The Republic of Korea requested adding a chapter on lessons learned from the implementation, monitoring and verification of national adaptation plans.
Point of departure and key concepts (Chapter 1): On Thursday, Bolivia said this chapter should include interactions between human and natural systems. India supported including reference to adaptation stocktaking.
On Friday, Co-Chair Roberts highlighted changes in the revised chapter outline, including: a more consistent treatment of risk; a more exhaustive treatment of adaptation options; and a better reflection of the intersections between mitigation and adaptation. Nicaragua requested adding reference to the UNFCCC in the bullet point addressing the changing policy context. Following further discussions, the Group agreed to include references to risk uncertainties in the bullet point addressing the climate risk framework, and nature and ecosystem-based adaptation and resilience in the bullet point addressing the significance of adaptation.
On Sunday morning, Co-Chair Roberts introduced new text resulting from informal consultations on loss and damage, which included a new bullet point on “scientific, technical and socio-economic aspects of current and future residual impacts, including residual damage, irreversible loss, and non-economic losses caused by slow onset and extreme events.” She explained that a reference to limits to adaptation was added to the bullet point on enabling conditions for effective adaptation. Saint Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago expressed their support for the proposed text.
Saudi Arabia requested removing reference to “non-economic losses,” expressing his concern that authors would fail to consider economic losses if only non-economic losses were mentioned. Saint Lucia, Jamaica and FWCC opposed, noting the importance of considering losses that are difficult to monetize. Co-Chair Roberts proposed “economic and non-economic losses” as a compromise. With those changes, the chapter outline was agreed.
Terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and their services (Chapter 2): On Thursday, Ireland requested consideration of the vulnerability of carbon stocks in soils and biomass and of major ocean cycles. Bolivia, Venezuela and South Africa called for referring to ecosystem “benefits” rather than “services.”
On Friday, Co-Chair Roberts noted that the revised outline endeavored to ensure consistency in the treatment of sustainable development and the SDGs. The group agreed to relocate reference to ecosystem “benefits” to the guidance to authors. With this change, the chapter outline was agreed.
Ocean and coastal ecosystems and their services (Chapter 3): On Thursday, Norway, Japan, Canada and Belgium requested adding reference to impacts from ocean acidification, and Bolivia to economic development.
Following discussion of the revised draft on Friday, Co-Chair Pörtner proposed, and the group agreed, to reference “ocean warming, ocean acidification and oxygen loss” in the bullet addressing projected hazards and exposure. Regarding the terminology of ecosystem “services” and “benefits,” Bolivia proposed, and the group agreed, to include a reference to IPBES in the guidance to authors. With these changes, the chapter outline was agreed.
Water (Chapter 4): In Thursday’s discussions, China called for removing reference to transboundary water resources, while India suggested addressing the link between water and food, potentially in a cross-chapter box.
On Friday, during the discussion on the revised outline, Ukraine suggested, and the group agreed, to refer to quality and quantity of water resources when addressing long-term risks of water security. The chapter outline was then agreed.
Food, fibre and other ecosystem products (Chapter 5): On Thursday, India, with Norway, called for reference to fishing and subsistence farming. India, supported by Switzerland, Belgium and Zambia, urged a stronger focus on agriculture. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) supported inclusion of socio-economic impacts.
On Friday, Co-Chair Roberts noted the revised chapter outline gave greater visibility to agriculture, forestry and fisheries and aimed to clarify the concept of managed ecosystems, which had been in the original chapter title, by referring to “ecosystem products.”
Switzerland and Haiti, opposed by India, Ecuador and Venezuela, favored referring to “ecosystem goods and services” rather than “ecosystem products” in the chapter’s title, but this was not taken on board. India requested including reference to “feed” to the title. In the ensuing discussion, some participants requested assurance that the distinction between inputs and outputs is maintained. As such, the Group agreed that consideration of inputs like feed and fertilizer would be added to guidance for authors.
Zambia favored broadening the text beyond “the production of food” in a bullet on adaptation options, noting that many countries experience losses along the entire food chain. The group also agreed to include reference to other ecosystem products in this bullet point.
The chapter outline was agreed.
Cities, settlements and key infrastructure (Chapter 6): On Friday, Saudi Arabia questioned the placement of reference to health and air quality in the bullet point mentioning adaptation options, adaptive capacity, responses and outcomes, with the group agreeing to relocate it to the bullet point addressing the energy-water-health nexus. After further debate, the Group agreed not to mention specific sectors in the bullet point on the detection and attribution of observed impacts and responses, and to include sectoral consideration in guidance to authors. With these changes, the chapter outline was agreed.
Health, wellbeing and the changing structure of communities (Chapter 7): On Friday, Saudi Arabia and South Africa opposed reference to human security in the bullet point on psychological, cultural and socio-economic dimensions. Germany supported including reference to conflict and human security. The WGII Bureau suggested to delete reference to “human security” and to add reference to the sustainable development context in the bullet point on adaptation options, limits to adaptation, and their social, environmental and economic implications. With these changes, the chapter outline was agreed.
Poverty, livelihoods and economic development (Chapter 8): On Thursday, India noted missing links between actual and predicted vulnerability conditions and suggested addressing human security. Returning to this issue and in response to Saudi Arabia’s concern about reference to human security in the bullet point addressing opportunities for development, Co-Chair Pörtner suggested, and the group agreed, to reference the definition of human security as contained in the AR5 in the guidance for authors.
On Sunday morning, the group considered revised text on the bullet point addressing opportunities for development, with Co-Chair Pörtner noting the insertion of “coping with loss and residual risk” after “human security,” which the Group agreed to. The chapter outline was then agreed.
Regional chapters (Chapters 9-15): These chapters were first addressed on Thursday. Belgium suggested reflecting limitations of regional assessments in the regional chapters. Following consultations, several elements were added to the initial list of common elements to be considered across all regional chapters, including:
detection and attribution of observed impacts and responses in natural and human systems on diverse time scales;
region-specific information on exposure and vulnerability;
current sectoral climate risks, including specific regional and sub-regional considerations related to land, coasts and regional oceans;
different types of knowledge systems;
diverse adaptation options;
interaction of risks and responses to climate change with sustainable development pathways; and
implications of availability and heterogeneity of data, including the use of grey literature.
The proposed regional chapters and the list of common elements were agreed on Saturday afternoon.
Key risks across sectors and regions (Chapter 16): This chapter outline was agreed as presented without modification.
Decision-making options for managing risk through adaptation (Chapter 17): On Thursday, Saudi Arabia, opposed by France, requested removing reference to the social cost of carbon from the bullet point on costs and non-monetized loss, benefits, synergies and trade-offs. On Saturday afternoon, Co-Chair Pörtner presented a revised version of the chapter outline, noting that reference to the social cost of carbon had been removed. The Maldives, supported by Mali and others, asked for explicit mention of adaptation costs, which Co-Chair Pörtner suggested adding to the author guidance. Saint Lucia asked to mention residual risk and limits to risk management in the bullet on decision-making and governance for managing risk, which was also agreed to. India, supported by Venezuela, asked for a bullet on international cooperation for adaptation and adaptation planning and implementation to the chapter. With these changes, the chapter outline was approved.
Climate resilient development pathways (Chapter 18): The Russian Federation proposed deleting reference to progress on the global stocktake from the bullet point on assessing risk and the level of adaptation. Supported by Saudi Arabia, he preferred referring to “adaptation pathways” instead of “transformation” in the proposed title. Saudi Arabia supported including economic diversification in a bullet point on drivers of decision making.
On Saturday afternoon, a revised chapter outline was presented. The Russian Federation, supported by Saudi Arabia and the US, expressed concern that including reference to the global stocktake in this chapter would imply an obligation for the IPCC to analyze the level of adaptation and presented alternative text. The US suggested removing reference to the level of adaptation, and maintaining reference to the global stocktake in the framing chapter (Chapter 1). Norway opposed.
Following informal consultations, IPCC Vice-Chair Ko Barrett suggested altering the language to read “considering risk and adaptation in the context of the global stocktake.” South Africa opposed, preferring to retain reference to the level of adaptation insofar as it links to climate resilient development pathways, and suggested moving reference to the global stocktake to the guidance for the authors.
Regarding a bullet point on adaptation pathways, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and Bolivia, opposed by Norway, asked for the addition of economic diversification, and requested removal of reference to the social cost of carbon, preferring instead to refer to the “social effects of GHG emissions,” which India supported and Ireland, Belgium and the Netherlands opposed, with the latter proposing to refer to externalities as an alternative. Following further discussions, the Group agreed to accept language on the “social effects of GHG emissions,” and to include that the social effects of GHG emissions include their external costs (social cost of GHGs) be included in the guidance to authors.
Venezuela, supported by Ecuador and Saudi Arabia, proposed removing the concept of “human security” in the bullet on adaptation pathways, noting it was not appropriate in the context of resilience. Co-Chair Pörtner suggested replacing it with “human wellbeing,” to which the group agreed. The Netherlands requested, and the group agreed, to include the definition of human security as contained in the AR5 glossary in the guide to authors.
On Sunday morning, following informal consultations, the Group revisited the bullet point addressing the synthesis of risk and levels of adaptation. The US requested to include reference to the global stocktake in guidance for authors and to simultaneously add reference to the global stocktake to the introduction and framing chapter bullet on changing policy context. Saint Lucia suggested adding reference to the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage and periodic review of temperature goals in the guidance for authors. With those changes, the chapter outline was approved.
Cross-chapter papers: On Thursday, France and Spain asked for a cross-chapter box on Mediterranean regions. The Group agreed to have cross-chapter papers instead of boxes.
On Friday, Sweden, Canada and Norway suggesting covering polar regions in a stand-alone chapter, because the polar regions require an arrangement to ensure that the material is assessed by the right scientists. The US suggested inserting the cross-chapter paper on polar regions with the regional chapters.
Saudi Arabia and Switzerland expressed concern regarding the number of pages proposed for the cross-chapter paper on deserts, semi-arid areas and desertification (5 pages) and mountains (also 5 pages), noting more pages may be required.
On Saturday afternoon, Co-Chair Pörtner presented the revised cross-chapter papers for approval. India asked for a cross-chapter paper on the Himalayas and Saudi Arabia called for the paper on deserts to include consideration of sandstorms and dust. Agreement was reached to include reference to the Himalayas, and to sandstorms and dust, in the guidance document for authors. Ecuador, supported by India, asked for an increase in the length for the cross-chapter paper on mountains from 10 to 15 pages, which was agreed. The cross-chapter papers were approved.
On Sunday, during the closing of the WGII session, Co-Chair Roberts noted that author nominations will begin after the conclusion of IPCC-46, author selection is expected in January 2018, and the first Lead Author meeting is scheduled for January 2019 in Durban, South Africa. She emphasized that countries pay particular attention to which authors they nominate for the cross-chapter papers. Co-Chair Roberts noted that the next WGII session is scheduled for October 2021 when participants will approve the SPM, while a joint WG session will approve SR15 in October 2018. She closed the WGII session at 11:00 am.
Report to the IPCC Plenary: On Sunday afternoon, during the IPCC plenary, Co-Chair Pörtner presented the WGII report outline that was agreed during the WGII plenary session, noting that the WGs will develop a glossary common to all three reports.
Saint Lucia expressed regret that, given the outcome of WGII discussions, the IPCC is “still not ready to take the term ‘loss and damage’ on board,” calling it a “missed opportunity” given that the issue currently figures in the scientific literature and will continue to do so. She affirmed her confidence that the authors will consider the relevant literature as appropriate, and expressed her wish that the concept be considered in the SYR. The WGII outline was agreed.
Final Decision: In the final decision (WGII:11th/Doc.2, Rev.1), the Panel agrees to the outline of WGII’s contribution to the AR6. The Panel decided that the bulleted text in the outline should be considered indicative by the authors and that the authors elaborate on the relevant scientific literature available since AR5, consistent with IPCC guidance. The report will total approximately 970 pages.
The outline contains: an SPM (pages TBD) and a Technical Summary (40 pages), as well as 18 chapters separated into three sections. Chapter 1 addresses the point of departure and key concepts (30 pages). Section 1 addresses risks, adaptation and sustainability for systems impacts by climate change and is comprised of seven chapters:
terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems and their services (60 pages);
ocean and coastal ecosystems and their services (60 pages);
water (60 pages);
food, fibre, and other ecosystem products (60 pages);
cities, settlements and key infrastructure (60 pages);
health, wellbeing and the changing structure of communities (50 pages); and
poverty, livelihoods and sustainable development (60 pages).
Section 2 addresses regions and has seven chapters:
Africa (50 pages);
