Summary report, 8–12 May 2019
49th Session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC-49)
Report PDF
On Sunday evening, 12 May 2019, the 49th session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC-49) adopted the Overview Chapter of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019 Refinement) and accepted the underlying report. A small number of delegates registered their objection to what they considered inconsistent treatment in the report of fugitive emissions from oil and gas exploration on the one hand and coal exploration on the other. Following lengthy discussions on how to reflect the lack of consensus in the decision text, the Panel agreed to refer to Principle 10(b), which sets out the procedure when there are differing views and consensus cannot be reached, and to include the text of the principle in a footnote.
IPCC-49 also adopted decisions on:
the terms of reference of the Task Group on Gender Policy and Gender Implementation Plan;
guidance to the Board of Trustees on the use of the IPCC Scholarship Programme Fund;
beginning preparatory work during the sixth assessment cycle for a methodological report on short-lived climate forcers to be completed during the seventh assessment cycle; and
the Trust Fund Programme and Budget.
During IPCC-49, the Panel also took note of reports on, inter alia, progress made by the Task Group on the Organization of the Future Work of the IPCC in Light of the Global Stocktake and progress by the Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories and the three IPCC Working Groups.
IPCC-49 convened from 8-12 May 2019, in Kyoto, Japan, and brought together more than 380 participants from over 125 countries.
A Brief History of the IPCC
The IPCC was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess, in a comprehensive, objective, open and transparent manner, the scientific, technical, and socio-economic information relevant to understanding human-induced climate change, its potential impacts, and adaptation and mitigation options. The IPCC is an intergovernmental and scientific body with 195 member countries. It does not undertake new research or monitor climate-related data; instead, it conducts assessments of the state of climate change knowledge on the basis of published and peer-reviewed scientific and technical literature. IPCC reports are intended to be policy relevant, but not policy prescriptive.
The IPCC has three Working Groups (WGs):
Working Group I (WG I) addresses the physical science basis of climate change.
Working Group II (WG II) addresses climate change impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability.
Working Group III (WG III) addresses options for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and mitigating climate change.
Each WG has two Co-Chairs and seven Vice-Chairs, with the exception of WG II, which has eight Vice-Chairs. The Co-Chairs guide the WGs in fulfilling the mandates given to them by the Panel with the assistance of Technical Support Units (TSUs).
The IPCC also has a Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) with two Co-Chairs to oversee the IPCC National GHG Inventories Programme, which is also supported by a TSU. The Programme aims to develop and refine an internationally-agreed methodology and software for calculating and reporting national GHG emissions and removals, and encourage its use by parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
The Panel elects its Bureau for the duration of a full assessment cycle, which includes preparation of an IPCC assessment report. The Bureau plans, coordinates, and monitors the IPCC’s work, and is composed of climate change experts representing all regions. Currently, the Bureau comprises 34 members, and includes the IPCC Chair and Vice-Chairs, WG Co-Chairs and Vice-Chairs, and TFI Co-Chairs. In 2011, the IPCC established an Executive Committee (ExCom) to assist with intersessional work and coordination among the WGs. The IPCC has a permanent Secretariat, which is based in Geneva, Switzerland, and hosted by the WMO.
IPCC Products: Since its inception, the IPCC has prepared a series of comprehensive assessment reports, special reports (SRs) and technical papers that provide scientific information on climate change to the international community.
The IPCC has produced five assessment reports, which were completed in 1990, 1995, 2001, 2007, and 2014. The Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) is expected to be completed in 2022. The assessment reports are structured in three parts, one for each WG. Each WG’s contribution comprises a Summary for Policymakers (SPM), a Technical Summary and the full underlying assessment report. Each report undergoes an exhaustive and intensive review process by experts and governments, involving three stages: a first review by experts, a second review by experts and governments, and a third review by governments.
Each SPM is then approved line-by-line by the respective WG. A Synthesis Report (SYR) is produced for the assessment report as a whole and integrates the most relevant aspects of the three WG reports and SRs of that specific cycle. The Panel then undertakes a line-by-line approval of the SPM of the SYR.
The IPCC produced a range of SRs and technical papers on climate change-related issues through the fifth assessment cycle, including:
Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (2000);
Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage (2005);
Climate Change and Water (2008);
Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation (2011); and
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation (2011).
The sixth assessment cycle includes three Special Reports:
Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15), which was approved by IPCC-48 in October 2018;
Climate Change and Land (SRCCL), which is expected to be approved by IPCC-50 in August 2019; and
Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC), which is expected to be approved by IPCC-51 in September 2019.
In addition, the IPCC produces methodology reports, which provide guidelines to assist countries in reporting on GHGs. Good Practice Guidance reports were approved by the Panel in 2000 and 2003. The latest version of the IPCC Guidelines on National GHG Inventories was approved in 2006. Additionally, in 2013, the IPCC adopted a Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Wetlands (Wetlands Supplement), and the Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol (KP Supplement). A Refinement to the 2006 Guidelines was to be adopted at IPCC-49 in Kyoto.
In 2007, the IPCC was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, jointly with former US Vice President Al Gore, for its work and efforts “to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about manmade climate change, and to lay the foundations needed to counteract such change.”
Sixth Assessment Cycle
IPCC-41 to IPCC-43: IPCC-41 (24-27 February 2015, Nairobi, Kenya) addressed future IPCC work; took a decision on the size, structure, and composition of the IPCC and TFI Bureaux; and adopted decisions relevant to the sixth assessment cycle. IPCC-42 (5-8 October 2015, Dubrovnik, Croatia) elected Bureaux members for the sixth assessment cycle. IPCC-43 (11-13 April 2016, Nairobi, Kenya) agreed to undertake two SRs (SRCCL and SROCC) and the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 Guidelines for GHG Inventories during the sixth assessment cycle. In addition, in response to an invitation from the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP 21), asking the IPCC to provide an SR in 2018 on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, IPCC-43 agreed to prepare SR15.
The Panel also agreed at that time that an SR on cities would be prepared as part of the seventh assessment cycle.
IPCC-44: During this session (17-21 October 2016, Bangkok, Thailand), the Panel adopted outlines of SR15 and the 2019 Refinement. The IPCC also adopted decisions on, inter alia: an Expert Meeting on Mitigation, Sustainability, and Climate Stabilization Scenarios; communications and the AR6 scoping process; and a meeting on climate change and cities.
IPCC-45: This meeting (28-31 March 2017, Guadalajara, Mexico) approved the SRCCL and SROCC outlines, and discussed, inter alia: the strategic planning schedule for the sixth assessment cycle; a proposal to consider short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs); and options for resourcing the IPCC, which led to the decision to establish the Ad Hoc Task Group on the Financial Stability of the IPCC (ATG-Finance).
IPCC-46: During this session (6-10 September 2017, Montreal, Canada), the Panel, inter alia, approved the chapter outlines for the three WG report contributions to the AR6.
IPCC Cities and Climate Change Science Conference: This meeting (5-7 March 2018, Edmonton, Canada) brought together participants from the science, policy, and practice communities to discuss current and future sources of emissions, and identify pathways for cities to pursue emission reductions and resilience strategies. The meeting produced a research agenda to better understand climate change, its impacts on cities and the critical role local authorities can play in addressing the climate challenge.
IPCC-47: During this session (13-16 March 2018, Paris, France), the Panel agreed to, inter alia:
establish a task group on gender;
draft terms of reference for a task group on the organization of the future work of the IPCC in light of the Global Stocktake (GST) under the Paris Agreement;
expand the IPCC Scholarship Programme to include funding for chapter scientists; and
enhance developing country participation in IPCC activities.
The Panel also heard presentations by WG Co-Chairs on the reports from the WG Bureaux. The meeting was preceded by a 30th anniversary celebration of the IPCC, hosted by the Government of France.
IPCC-48: During this session (1-6 October 2018, Incheon, Republic of Korea), the IPCC approved the SR15 and its Technical Summary and adopted the SPM. A Joint Session of the WGs considered the SPM line-by-line to reach agreement, representing the first time the three WGs had collaborated together, in an interdisciplinary fashion, on an IPCC SR. The SPM consists of four sections:
Understanding global warming of 1.5°C;
Projected climate change, potential impacts, and associated risks;
Emission pathways and system transitions consistent with 1.5°C global warming; and
Strengthening the global response in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty.
The SPM concludes, inter alia, that, limiting global average temperature rise to 1.5ºC is still possible, but will require “unprecedented” transitions in all aspects of society.
IPCC-49 Report
On Wednesday morning, 8 May 2019, IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee opened the session, highlighting Japan’s leadership in hosting the TFI TSU at the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies. He also welcomed the expected approval of the 2019 Refinement to the 2006 Guidelines on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, noting that this will ensure that the methodologies used to compile national inventories is based on the latest science.
Via video, Yoshiaki Harada, Japanese Minister of Environment, welcomed participants on behalf of the Government of Japan. He recalled the IPCC’s development of the scientific foundation leading to the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol, the Paris Agreement and the 2018 Paris Rulebook. He noted Japan’s goal to create a model of a “virtuous cycle” for environment and growth, while ensuring quality of life and a sustainable society, and Japan’s current discussions on early achievement of a decarbonized society post-2050.
Jian Liu, Chief Scientist, UNEP, thanked Japan for its leadership on combating climate change, noting the importance of the City of Kyoto as the birthplace of the Kyoto Protocol, and expressing enthusiasm that it will now be the home of a new milestone in the form of the 2019 Refinement. He noted that greater ambition is needed to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement and emphasized the importance of political and scientific leadership at this moment.
Florin Vladu, UNFCCC Secretariat, noted that 2019 presents a new opportunity to strengthen collaboration efforts and emphasized the importance of the 2019 Refinement to enhance transparency and trust in multilateralism. He expressed thanks for SR15 and anticipation for the IPCC’s other forthcoming work products that will together serve as vital inputs to reach the levels of ambition necessary to achieve the goals laid out in the Paris Agreement.
IPCC Chair Lee then presented the provisional agenda for adoption (IPCC-XLIX/Doc.1, Rev.1). Noting that the 7th session of the Plenary of the Intergovernmental Platform for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES-7) had recently concluded with a call for a joint IPBES and IPCC technical report on biodiversity and climate change, France proposed inserting this into the IPCC-49 agenda under Other Business.
The provisional agenda was adopted with France’s amendment.
The draft report of IPCC-48 (IPCC-XLIX/Doc.4, Rev.1) was adopted with minor amendments.
Adoption and Acceptance of the 2019 Refinement of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019 Refinement)
The Overview Chapter of the 2019 Refinement was addressed in TFI plenary sessions, contact groups, and informal consultations throughout the five-day meeting. On Wednesday, TFI Co-Chair Eduardo Calvo introduced the Overview Chapter and the underlying report and relevant documents (IPCC-XLIX/Doc.3a, Rev.1; IPCC-XLIX/Doc.3b, Rev.1; IPCC-XLIX/INF.1, Rev. 2). The Overview Chapter was considered section by section.
1. Introduction: On Wednesday, TFI Co-Chair Kiyoto Tanabe introduced this section, which states the aim and nature of the report. India expressed concern regarding the feasibility for developing countries to use the 2019 Refinement. Saudi Arabia, supported by Egypt, called for inserting reference to potential capacity-building and financial needs required for utilization of the 2019 Refinement. New Zealand, supported by the UK, the US, Norway, and Switzerland, objected, noting that: such a statement was beyond the scope of the Refinement; the Panel did not yet know whether such a statement would prove to be true; and the 2019 Refinement was meant for inventory compilers and not policymakers.
The UK said that others, including the UNFCCC, would decide on the implications of using the 2019 Refinement, while Norway stressed the need to protect the integrity of the IPCC by keeping the purview of the UNFCCC and the IPCC separate. As an alternative, TFI Co-Chair Calvo suggested inserting language stating that the implications using the 2019 Refinement were not assessed, but this proposal was not accepted either.
TFI Co-Chair Tanabe drew attention to language in Section 3 on key concepts, which states that the 2019 Refinement is intended for all countries and inventory compilers, including those with no prior experience. Switzerland suggested moving this language to the Introduction.
Following informal consultations this issue, TFI Co-Chair Calvo reported there was agreement to insert text in the report of the session, which was accepted. The text states that:
a group of countries raised a concern that resource requirements for implementation of the 2019 Refinement were not assessed during its development process and that capacity-building support may be needed for some countries, in particular developing countries; and
another group of countries noted that: resource requirement assessment was not included in the scope of the 2019 Refinement; assessment of such needs is not an appropriate task for authors of technical guidelines for GHG inventories; and discussions on resource requirements and capacity-building needs would be more appropriate in other multilateral bodies.
2. Background: This section was addressed on Wednesday. Tanzania suggested removing the qualifying term “abundant” to describe new scientific and empirical knowledge, stating that the term is subjective. With this deletion, this section was approved.
3. Key Concepts Unchanged from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines: This session was addressed on Wednesday. Saudi Arabia requested insertion of a caveat regarding the financial and capacity-building implications of implementing the updated guidelines, or, alternatively, a caveat stating that the 2019 Refinement did not assess such implications. The US opposed language regarding financial or capacity-building implications. Multiple textual changes were suggested for the sake of clarity. The TFI Co-Chairs requested that interested delegates work to resolve this in informal consultations. (See Section 1, on Introduction, for resolution of this issue.)
4. Coverage of the 2019 Refinement: This section was addressed on Wednesday afternoon and was adopted as presented.
5. Relationship with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines: This section was addressed on Wednesday. India questioned inclusion of a paragraph noting that the Guidelines can also be relevant at the subnational, entity, or project level, pointing out that the mandate is for Guidelines for national GHG inventories. Following deletion of this paragraph, the section was agreed.
6. Specific Developments in the 2019 Refinement: Volume 1 (General Guidance and Reporting):Participants discussed a paragraph on comparing GHG emission estimates with atmospheric measurements on Wednesday and Thursday. Following comments from the US, Germany, France, and the UK, text was modified to reflect that the guidance highlights key components and steps to be used when atmospheric measurements and inverse models are used as inputs to, or for comparison with, the inventory emissions estimates.
Regarding a paragraph on indirect GHG emissions, TFI Co-Chair Calvo requested the authors to formulate language in response to a call by Canada to omit reference to carbon dioxide (CO2) when addressing CO2 precursors such as methane. Following the introduction of new language explaining that indirect GHG emissions can come from emissions of carbon-containing compounds that are not already accounted for in GHG emissions, participants agreed to Germany’s request to change “accounted for” to “reported in” GHG inventories. A footnote was also added to explain that these compounds contain unoxidized carbon emitted from anthropogenic activities, and that CO2 is not released directly from these activities but forms at a later time in the atmosphere. This text was then accepted.
Germany asserted that plant biomass CO2 is unlike other CO2 and, supported by Finland, called for reflecting Chapter 8 of the underlying report, on reporting guidance and tables, in the Overview Chapter. The Coordinating Lead Authors (CLAs) agreed to prepare a new paragraph, which was presented on Thursday. The proposed paragraph, on national GHG inventory coverage, addresses how to deal with CO2 capture in terms of reporting, and emissions from biochar production and from flooded lands. The new paragraph was accepted.
Volume 2 (Energy): This text was first addressed on Wednesday. On fugitive emissions from fuel transformation, Germany, supported by France and the US, called for reporting all non-CO2 emissions from non-combustion in the energy sector. The CLAs on energy and agriculture, forestry, and other land use (AFOLU) responded that because biochar is not from a fuel transformation process it will not be known to energy compilers, so the principle is to report emissions where they occur, for consistency with the 2006 Guidelines. Delegates discussed whether biochar should be covered in this volume or in Volume 4 (AFOLU), given its different purposes. France and Germany favored its inclusion in AFOLU when used as a fertilizer for agriculture. This was considered a cross-cutting issue and deferred for further consultations among the authors. Following informal discussions, biochar was added to a list of sources of fugitive emissions from fuel transformation under this sector. To address a concern of the Russian Federation, a cross-reference to discussions of methodology on fugitive emissions in Volumes 3 (Industrial processes and product use) and 4 (AFOLU) was added at the end of the paragraph.
In response to questions from Saudi Arabia on emission factors derived from only one source or data from one country, the CLA replied that the mandate was to develop technology or practice-specific emission factors for Tier 1. Tier 1 is the least complex of the IPCC classification of methodological approaches, according to quantity of information required and degree of analytical complexity, with Tier 3 being the most complex.
On another question posed by Saudi Arabia on new guidance for fugitive emissions from exploration activities, the CLA clarified that this provides more reporting options but not an added reporting burden, as the scope is not widened.
On Saturday afternoon, after the section had been considered in its entirety, Saudi Arabia, supported by Iran and Algeria, objected to inconsistency in the treatment of oil and gas exploration and coal exploration in Volume 2, saying coal emits much more than oil and gas.
The CLA responded that only energy sources that have publicly available data across a range of production types become the subject of instructions in the main text of the Guidelines. Where emissions and/or removals are poorly understood and insufficient information exists, the 2019 Refinement follows the 2006 Guidelines’ practice of putting information on that source into an appendix. Another CLA noted that differences in the depth at which coal, oil, and gas are found means that coal has no gas blowouts that can be used to measure fugitive emissions.
Saudi Arabia asserted that the confidence levels contained in the scientific references for oil and gas were low, and said the Refinement’s new sections for oil and gas should be put into an appendix.
Norway, supported by the US, the UK, China, Ireland, Luxembourg, Switzerland, and Canada, urged delegates to respect the authors’ judgment on the levels of scientific understanding of these energy types, but Saudi Arabia noted that respect for the authors had not prevented delegates from making changes to the authors’ expressed opinions in other sections of the Refinement. He suggested that a special report could address guidelines for coal.
TFI Co-Chair Calvo asked interested countries and authors to further discuss this issue informally.
Following informal consultations on Saturday afternoon and Sunday morning, TFI Co-Chair Calvo reopened the discussion on Sunday afternoon, noting that some relevant information on coal exploration had been moved from the appendix to the main text of the underlying report, but that the authors felt there was no need for changes to the text on oil and gas.
In response to continued objections from Saudi Arabia, TFI Co-Chair Calvo noted that IPCC Principles and Procedures allow for two options in the case of failure to reach consensus: representing differing views on scientific, technical or socio-economic matters in the document concerned; or recording differences of views on matters of policy or procedure in the report of the session. He invited delegates to submit in writing any different views.
Saudi Arabia, supported by Iraq, Algeria, Syria, Egypt, Iran and Iraq, strongly objected to applying the IPCC Principles and Procedures, noting their objection was scientific in nature and bemoaned the bias they perceived. TFI Co-Chair Calvo stressed that the dispute concerned the underlying report, over which the authors have final say.
Tanzania, supported by Togo and South Africa, called for more time to try to reach a compromise.
A CLA confirmed that text and an equation on calculating fugitive emissions from coal exploration had been added to the main body of the text, but noted that so little literature exists on fugitive emissions from coal exploration that emissions factors are only a matter of expert opinion.
The TFI Co-Chairs called for more informal consultations and an extension of the session to accommodate this, although New Zealand cautioned that taking final decisions late in the evening might risk a lack of a quorum.
Additional informal consultations brought no agreement on moving, totally or partially, the section on oil and gas fugitive emissions to an appendix, with the CLAs reiterating that the science on oil and gas was robust enough for the main text. TFI Co-Chair Calvo reminded participants that the underlying report cannot be negotiated, and that the science must be respected.
Canada noted the existence of an official error protocol by which an IPCC member state finding a gap or mistake can submit a correction for evaluation.
Norway, supported by France, the UK, Canada, Switzerland, and China, urged delegates to protect the integrity of the IPCC and use its Principles and Procedures covering a situation of no consensus. TFI Co-Chair Calvo reiterated that any countries with a differing view can submit it in writing, to be recorded as per Principle 10(b). Saudi Arabia agreed to proceed if his objection was recorded. On that condition, the section was agreed.
Volume 3 (Industrial Processes and Product Use): India requested guidance on reporting emissions from iron and steel production when the default Tier 1 methodologies are not suitable and Tier 3 is not yet feasible. The CLA agreed that Tier 1 provides information on general average worldwide conditions but is not the most precise option, and, with TFI Co-Chair Calvo, pointed to the Emission Factor Database where countries can find values that better fit their conditions and apply them to Tier 2. This section was agreed with no change.
Volume 4 (Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use):Discussions on this volume began in Plenary on Thursday and continued in contact groups and informal consultations throughout the week.
On interannual variability (IAV), the Russian Federation expressed concern with a new approach suggested for disaggregating emissions and removals from natural disturbances, noting that differentiating between natural and anthropogenic emissions and removals is extremely complicated, if not impossible, and could lead to false conclusions. Given these limits, she said, it was preferable to maintain the current use of background levels for natural disturbances and the managed land proxy for estimating anthropogenic emissions and removals, which, if not perfect, at least enables transparency.
Finland supported this proposal, adding that factoring out natural effects for some land uses and not others is unbalanced. Likewise, the US questioned the value added of the approach, and cautioned against country-specific definitions, which would pose challenges for comparability and possibly introduce inconsistencies and loopholes. She underscored the need to maintain reporting on national totals.
Italy stressed the importance of ensuring completeness and comparability, and said a clear definition of natural disturbances would be needed to allow inventory compilers to do their work.
In contrast, Canada and Australia said the guidance in the 2019 Refinement represents a significant improvement to the 2006 Guidelines and that, as a second order approximation, it enables countries with large natural disturbances to disaggregate and identify drivers of emissions and removals, thus helping policymakers make better decisions.
Recognizing the difficulty of clearly distinguishing between natural and anthropogenic effects, the CLA explained that the guidance on such disaggregation was proposed for voluntary use by countries as a second order approach, with the first order still being the managed land proxy. He reassured the US that national totals will still be reported, and that the guidance was for those wishing to go further in their reporting, adding that this is for estimation purposes and not for accounting, which would depend on decisions under the UNFCCC. The Russian Federation noted that reporting forms the basis for accounting, so their relationship cannot be ignored.
The US, the Russian Federation, and Finland proposed possibly moving the section on natural disturbances to an appendix, saying that it only applies to a few countries. The CLA agreed this could be considered.
Discussions continued in a contact group, which met numerous times throughout the session. On Saturday afternoon, Riitta Pipatti (Finland), contact group rapporteur, reported that the group had addressed the concerns expressed. She explained that the paragraph in the Overview Chapter was modified to clarify the need to report on national totals. She said the text also clarifies that a generic methodology is provided to report the disaggregated contribution of natural disturbances for those countries that have high IAV due to natural disturbances, not as a higher order approach but as an additional reporting option.
On soil carbon, Germany expressed concern about estimating the long-term stability of biochar using Tier 1 methodologies. The CLA responded that special instruments are not available in many countries to use Tier 2 methods, but that countries can use less precise temperature measurements at the Tier 1 level to get some information about biochar’s long-term stability.
India noted that the effect of adding biochar to mineral soil remains uncertain and more progress must be made regarding the state of scientific knowledge.
The CLA explained that to qualify as biochar for use of Tier 1 methodologies, the substance must be produced through low-temperature pyrolysis (limited-oxygen heating). He rejected a suggestion to expand the biochar definition to include other production methods or to use Tier 1 methods on biochar in ecosystems other than cropland or grassland; however, he noted that Tier 2 or Tier 3 methods can be used to address the effects of biochar in other ecosystems.
Germany questioned the permanence of biochar, especially given the effects of variability in soil types to which biochar is applied, and called for periodic verifications to be included in the methodology to address the significant uncertainties about its long-term stability.
The CLA agreed that biochar produced at an uncontrolled or unspecified temperature would not be appropriate for Tier 1-level analysis. He agreed to remove lines in a table on default values for Fperm𝐩 (the fraction of biochar carbon remaining after 100 years) in the underlying report that seemed to show biochar production at uncontrolled or unspecified pyrolysis temperatures.
Responding to concerns from Germany and France, the CLA noted that biochar was originally given its own subcategory and that Tier 1 methods are only appropriate for mineral soils, not for organic soils. He acknowledged priming effects when biochar is added to soils already containing carbon but said these effects can only be measured at higher Tier levels.
Following informal consultations, the CLA reported that information and guidance on Tier 1 methods for biochar in the underlying report would be moved to an appendix. TFI Co-Chair Tanabe noted that the changes in the underlying report would not affect the Overview Chapter.
Returning to this issue on Friday, reference to refinement of the “default” method for estimating the impact of biochar amendments on soil carbon stocks in mineral soils for cropland and grassland was changed to specify refinement of Tier 2 and 3 methods.
On flooded lands, the Russian Federation, the US, France, Italy, and Finland raised concern about a new approach related to “factoring-out emissions that would have occurred otherwise if the land remained unmanaged.” They noted that this is inconsistent with the Guidelines for other land uses and key IPCC concepts, and that introducing this would create serious problems, with the US saying that any consideration of what “would have occurred otherwise” is hypothetical in nature and should not be included in the reporting.
The Russian Federation emphasized the need to distinguish between anthropogenic and natural emissions and suggested that, if that is not possible, then continuing with the current approach as set forth in the Wetlands Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines is preferable.
The CLA explained that, while he understood the concerns expressed, the methodology had been developed in response to the mandate from IPCC-44, which called for “factoring out what would happen if the land had not been converted.” TFI Co-Chair Calvo noted that the job of the TFI Co-Chairs had been to ensure that the mandate was followed. WG II Vice-Chair Sergei Semenov disagreed, saying that as a scientific organization, the IPCC could not let a bureaucratic error take precedence over a scientific matter, and proposed replacing reference to “emissions that would have occurred otherwise” with reference to factoring out the natural component of emissions and removals. The US called for deleting all references to “factoring out” in Volume 4 and in the Overview Chapter.
Finland suggested that the approach would be better placed in the appendix.
The CLA said the problem with deleting those references in the Overview Chapter is that the Overview would then not fully correspond with the methodology in the underlying report.
Norway opposed changing language or moving text to the appendix, calling for trust in the authors and their assurance that there is a scientific basis for the approach. Brazil drew attention to the number of studies on the subject and cautioned against establishing a precedent of changing a mandate.
Discussions continued in a contact group, which met multiple times during the week. On Saturday afternoon, Rob Sturgiss (Australia), contact group rapporteur, reported that authors and delegates had agreed on changes to address concerns expressed. The plenary then agreed to the group’s recommended changes to the paragraph in the Overview Chapter. In the paragraph on flooded lands, where it had originally stated that “methods include approaches for factoring out emissions that would have occurred otherwise if the land remained unmanaged,” text was changed to reflect that “methods include estimation of total emissions following the managed land proxy and an optional method to develop indicative estimates of the anthropogenic component of total approaches for factoring out emissions that would have occurred otherwise if the land remained unmanaged.”
With this, the paragraph was agreed.
Volume 5 (Waste): This section was approved as presented.
IPCC Plenary and Adoption of the 2019 Refinement: On Sunday night, IPCC Chair Lee reconvened the IPCC Plenary to adopt the decision on the 2019 Guidelines (Decision IPCC-XLIX-9), which included reference to a reservation by some countries. Saudi Arabia requested changing the decision language to better reflect its strong objection to the report’s treatment of fugitive emissions from oil, gas, and coal exploration. Switzerland, with Germany, expressed concern that the wording proposed would give the impression that the entire 2019 Guidelines lacked consensus, when it was just one issue. South Africa noted inconsistencies regarding how different decisions had been adopted during the session, and requested clarification on how decisions are adopted.
Following further consultations, Sophie Schlingemann, Legal and Liaison Officer, IPCC Secretariat, announced amendments to the decision text, including reference to IPCC Principle 10(b), which is invoked when member states fail to reach consensus.
Saudi Arabia, supported by Iran and Iraq, preferred more explicit language reflecting their objection. Germany, supported by New Zealand, IPCC Vice-Chair and Science Board Chair Ko Barrett, the UK, Norway, the US, Switzerland, Japan, France, Sweden, Belgium, and Spain, said that the IPCC Principles and Procedures are there for a reason and should be followed, opposed inserting language on “objections” in the decision text, and reiterated that the specific objections would be recorded in the report of the meeting.
Saudi Arabia then proposed inserting the full text of Principle 10(b) directly into the decision, but Switzerland and others objected. IPCC Vice-Chair Barrett suggested putting the Principle 10(b) text in a footnote, which was supported by the Netherlands, the Russian Federation, France, the US, Ireland, Algeria, and Norway. To ensure balance, Germany, supported by Norway, also called for putting in a footnote the full text of the other principles referred to in the decision. Saudi Arabia objected, noting that only Principle 10(b) addressed lack of consensus, the issue under discussion. IPCC Chair Lee noted the exceptional circumstances surrounding the need for inclusion of Principle 10(b) and implored Germany to accept the text as amended. Germany cautioned against setting a precedent. However, she indicated her flexibility to accept the decision with the footnote for Principle 10(b), given the late hour. With that, the decision was adopted.
Following adoption, Germany expressed her deepest thanks to the TFI Co-Chairs, authors, review editors, chapter scientists, and many others for their hard work over many months. TFI Co-Chair Tanabe recalled the agreement by the Panel to dedicate the 2019 Guidelines to the memory of Jim Penman, UK, for his lifetime of hard work and dedication, including to the IPCC. The UK praised Penman’s long, distinguished career as a scientist in addition to his warmth and kindness as a man.
Final Decision: In its decision (Decision IPCC-XLIX-9), the Panel adopts the Overview Chapter and accepts the underlying methodology report, in accordance with, inter alia, Principle 10(b) of the Principles Governing IPCC Work. A footnote includes the text of Principle 10(b).
The Overview Chapter contains six sections. Section 1 is an Introduction, which states that the 2019 Refinement provides:
supplementary methodologies for GHG sources and sinks only where gaps currently exist or where new technologies and production processes have emerged requiring elaborated methodologies or for sources and sinks that were not well covered by the 2006 IPCC Guidelines;
updated default values of emission factors and other parameters based on the latest available scientific information only where significant differences from the default values presented in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines are identified; and
additional or alternative up-to-date information and guidance, where possible, as clarification or elaboration of existing guidance in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.
Section 2 presents background information on the 2019 Refinement, including on its mandate and preparation.
Section 3 identifies key concepts unchanged from the 2006 Guidelines that should be noted when using the 2019 Refinement.
Section 4 addresses coverage of the 2019 Refinement, and states that refinements are included for only those categories where the science was considered to have sufficiently advanced since 2006 or where new or additional guidance was required.
Section 5 describes the relationship with the 2006 Guidelines. It explains that the 2019 Refinement does not revise the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, but updates, supplements, and/or elaborates the 2006 Guidelines where gaps or out-of-date science have been identified. In addition, the Refinement does not replace the Guidelines but, rather, should be used in conjunction with them and, where indicated, with the Wetlands Supplement.
Section 6, on specific developments in the 2019 Refinement, includes five volumes. Volume 1 on general guidance and reporting contains paragraphs on:
national GHG inventory arrangements and management tools;
data collection strategies;
use of facility-level data in inventories;
uncertainty analysis;
