social infrastructure and participatory
approaches;
codes, standards and certification;
rights to productive resources; and
research and technology development.
Ranganathan explained that the paper identifies
barriers and enabling environments for technology transfer in
different sectors of the economy. In the construction, transport,
industrial and energy supply sectors, barriers related to failures
in: reflecting economic and environmental costs in prices; enforcing
regulations; ensuring awareness of relevant measures; and developing
affordable cleaner technology. Positive measures to establish
enabling environments included liberalization and deregulation, the
setting of appropriate standards, support for market transformation,
adaptive research and development, and the strengthening of
capacities.
For agriculture and forestry, she noted barriers
relating to sources of food and livelihood security for developing
countries, the high cost of patented technology, and the limited
short-term profitability of some ESTs. Responses to these barriers
could include involvement of NGOs and participatory programmes with
stakeholders, cooperation with international institutions, the use
of national plant breeding laboratories, and research and
development. On solid waste management, barriers include limited
finance, greenhouse gas abatement, insufficient technological
know-how, and inadequate institutional capability. Responses could
include measures to encourage private sector participation,
recognition of socially-marginalized groups, proactive NGOs, and
adaptive research and development.
In the areas of public health and coastal zone
adaptation, barriers identified by the draft paper include the high
degree of uncertainty and costs of advanced information gathering
systems. Responses include the development of information on
sea-level monitoring in the public domain, the active involvement of
NGOs and national networks, and capacity building.
Identifying some cross-cutting issues raised in
the paper, Ranganathan stressed that market instruments often play a
more significant role for mitigation-focused sectors such as
construction, industry, transport and energy, while government and
socially-oriented organizations play the primary role in
adaptation-focused sectors such as agriculture and forestry, and in
coastal zone development. On the liberalization and restructuring of
the energy sector, she indicated that a portfolio of policy
instruments, public awareness raising, and regulation must be
combined with market based measures. She said that efforts to create
enabling environments for technology transfer are necessary in both
investor and host countries.
DISCUSSION: In the subsequent discussion, a
number of delegates said the draft technical paper was very useful,
while several noted the absence of detailed empirical information.
Responding to questions about the purpose of the paper, Ranganathan
answered that it aims to provide background information for policy
makers and will feed into the EGTT and SBSTA-18 discussions. One
developed country speaker said the report could have considered
certain issues in more detail, including the conditions and
circumstances that have led to successes and failures, the issue of
licensing, and the elements needed to replicate success from one
area to others. Another developed country requested more information
on the report's consideration of macro and micro level matters.
Responding to these requests for more detailed information,
Ranganathan observed that case studies of technology transfer in the
context of environmental issues were not particularly well described
in the existing literature. She also noted concerns that the
document should not be overly long. One developing country
participant stressed the importance of considering cross-sectoral
issues. On the question of adaptation and mitigation responses, he
suggested that some responses to climate change, such as pollution
prevention, could be categorized as both adaptation and mitigation.
BARRIERS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR TECHNOLOGY
TRANSFER: CASE STUDIES AND LESSONS LEARNED
On Wednesday afternoon, participants heard
presentations on two related issues: barriers to and opportunities
for technology transfer in specific sectors with regard to
mitigation and adaptation; and enabling environments for technology
transfer – incentives, standards, legal instruments and
institutional arrangements. The session was chaired by EGTT
Vice-Chair Richard Bradley (US).
BARRIERS TO AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR TECHNOLOGY
TRANSFER IN SPECIFIC SECTORS WITH REGARD TO MITIGATION AND
ADAPTATION TECHNOLOGIES: EGTT member Holger Liptow (Germany)
presented case studies under a programme developed between Brazil
and Germany, in Minas Gerais, Brazil, aiming at energy policy and
planning, energy efficiency and renewable energy sources. He
described a project to establish centers that house
shared/communally-owned machinery, and noted the need to determine
users' expectations, the existence of a market for their product,
and ways to enhance production. Ensuring suitable financial
arrangements for the machinery and interaction with the relevant
agricultural service organizations was also found to be important.
Liptow noted that from 1995-2000, this programme identified and
removed various obstacles, including inadequacies relating to:
scientific, engineering and technical
knowledge;
research and test facilities;
information relevant for strategic planning and
market development;
assessment of selected technologies and
their appropriate adaptation;
information on technology selection appropriate
to development priorities;
consumer awareness and acceptance of
technologies; and
technical standards and institutions for
supporting the standards.
Andrej Kranjc, Ministry of Environment, Spatial
Planning and Energy, Slovenia, identified three major steps in the
technology transfer process: technology needs assessments, the
creation of enabling environments, and the transfer or deployment of
a given technology. Noting comments that the private sector was
responsible for up to ten times more technology transfer than the
public sector, he said it was clear the public sector had a lot of
work to do. He suggested a strong focus on three issues raised in
the IPCC's Special Report on Methodological and Technological
Issues in Technology Transfer, namely human and institutional
capacities, national legal institutions, and equity considerations.
He also discussed the likely impact of EU expansion on countries
with economies in transition, including strengthened national legal
institutions and human and institutional capacity, as well as access
to relevant EU programmes.
Frederick Manyika, Senior Environmental Officer,
Tanzanian Division of Environment, presented a case study on
barriers to the transfer of solar photovoltaics (PV), in Mwanza.
Noting that less than ten percent of Tanzania's population has
access to grid electricity services and that most rural communities
use kerosene lamps for lighting, Manyika highlighted that solar PV
technology is an economically viable option for off-grid
electrification. He identified barriers to solar PV, including:
limited awareness of and experience with this technology; inadequate
business knowledge and capacity for distribution; the high costs
involved in start-up, operation and maintenance; and the low
purchasing power of rural communities.
Manyika also proposed some means of removing
these barriers, including:
building business knowledge and capacity for
distribution;
reducing tax and import duty;
stimulating local manufacture and assembly of
 components;
raising financial opportunities and public
awareness;
enacting appropriate legislation; and
developing and enforcing standards.
He concluded that government support is a key
component in creating energy efficiency and that technology transfer
requires financial support.
Peter Pembleton, Industrial Development Officer,
UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), reported on its work
on technology transfer and on promoting the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) in a number of developing countries. Identifying
interventions taken at the national level, he highlighted work to
develop appropriate legal frameworks, including the incorporation of
international treaties such as the UNFCCC into the national legal
system. Other national interventions have included:
reducing and simplifying investment approvals
and procedures;
increasing the amount of public funding
allocated to the development of innovative systems, structures and
institutions;
creating venture capital to support innovation;
reducing banks' interest rates; and
achieving macro-economic stability.
DISCUSSION: In the ensuing discussion, Holger
Liptow responded to a question about the dissemination of lessons
learned during individual projects by noting that stakeholder
organizations could disseminate information both internally and
externally. In the case of the Brazil-Germany programme, the
approach had spread to other utilities, even outside of Brazil. On a
question about mitigation and adaptation, Andrej Kranjc indicated
that, so far, more emphasis had been given to mitigation-related
technologies. However, he predicted that the profile of
adaptation-related technologies would increase over time. Noting
participants' comments on the CDM, Liptow highlighted the interest
in using this mechanism to help achieve technology transfer.
ENABLING ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER:
INCENTIVES, STANDARDS, LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS: Andrea Marroni, Expert on Developing Countries'
Issues with the Italian Ministry for Environment and Territory,
presented a paper on experiences and lessons learned from Italy's
programmes and projects relating to technology transfer. He
explained that Italian cooperation activities are aimed at, inter
alia:
continuing research and investment to promote
diffusion of renewable energy technology and transfer of low
emissions technologies under the UNFCCC;
testing new technologies;
fostering competitiveness of recipient
countries; and
stimulating long-term investments to enhance
stakeholders' participation and financial mechanisms.
Marroni highlighted various lessons learned,
including that the private sector is the main source of technology,
that strengthening the enabling environment in host countries is a
prerequisite for technology transfer, and that relevant
international bodies should support recipient countries in their
domestic reform efforts. On financing technology transfer for
developing countries, he said Italy favors debt-related actions such
as the Debt for Environment Swap, which provides for the debt
conversion into local currency funds devoted to environmental
protection.
Li Junfeng, Energy Research Institute, China,
highlighted major barriers for technology transfer, including a lack
of capacity for innovation and diffusion, obstacles to market
creation and expansion, the initial cost of technology research and
development, and inadequate institutional arrangements and human
capacity. He said that specific actions to encourage technology
transfer included incentives for the private sector to deliver
technologies to developing countries, and stressed that actions to
create enabling environments must be undertaken in both developed
and developing countries. He concluded that technology transfer
needs special financial support and could be transmitted through
official development assistance (ODA).
Shigetaka Seki, Director for Environmental
Affairs with Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry,
outlined Japan's recent work on technology transfer. This includes
the establishment of an inter-ministerial Liaison Committee for
using the Kyoto mechanisms. The Committee will design Joint
Implementation (JI) and CDM project approval and procedures
guidelines and consider JI/CDM project applications. He outlined
some public policies to facilitate CDM projects, including: a Kyoto
mechanisms guidebook in Japanese; development of Japan's National
Registry System; the Asia CDM capacity-building initiative; and
cooperation through the Climate Technology Initiative (CTI), an
intergovernmental organization founded by a number of OECD countries
to promote technology transfer. He concluded that the major barriers
for the CDM and JI include:
uncertainties related to institutional
settings, rules and procedures in host countries, including
interpretation of the concept of sustainable development;
uncertainties related to rules and procedures
under the UNFCCC;
difficulties in setting baselines;
protection of intellectual property rights;
pricing that fails to reflect true costs; and
insufficient enforcement of legislation.
Michael Gerbis, President of the Delphi Group,
presented a private sector perspective on enabling environments in
the context of the CDM and JI. Stressing the opportunities offered
by these mechanisms to facilitate technology transfer, he said
barriers to private sector investment include uncertainty about the
levels of risk involved, and restrictive rules and regulations.
Outlining some of the lessons learned during the Canada-Argentina
Capacity Building Initiative, he said the private sector required
clear risk assessment, strong returns on investment, consistent and
transparent rules from government, and a high potential for
replication of the business opportunity. While cautioning that the
building of enabling environments is often "difficult and slow," he
concluded that the process can succeed if it remains clear and
straightforward.
DISCUSSION: In the ensuing discussion,
Michael Gerbis responded to a question about the impact of the
recent economic difficulties in Argentina on the Canada-Argentina
initiative, noting that stakeholders had agreed to proceed with the
project regardless, since it presented an opportunity to improve
efficiency.
Noting the discussion on the CDM and JI, one
developing country speaker stressed that technology transfer under
the CDM should be additional to the technology transfer that takes
place under Article 4.5. In response, Gerbis acknowledged that the
issue of additionality is a "gray area," but noted that the CDM can
be used to support technology transfer and ultimately help move
forward on implementing Article 4.5.
CHAIR'S SUMMARY: Summarizing the afternoon's
discussions, Session Chair Richard Bradley noted that the
traditional differences between North and South remained unresolved,
with developed countries often focusing on the private sector and
market forces, while developing countries tend to stress the role of
the public sector and intergovernmental agreements. However, he
highlighted participants' unanimous agreement that governments have
an important role in terms of developing enabling environments. He
also drew attention to participants' comments on the importance of
sustainable, continuing engagement in technology transfer projects,
on the need to consider how projects can lead to multiple benefits,
and on the "adaptation versus mitigation" issue. He suggested that
the linkages between micro and macro approaches might require
further discussion. He also noted comments on the role international
mechanisms, such as the CDM, could play in encouraging technology
transfer.
WORKING GROUPS
On Thursday morning, 10 April, participants met
in two parallel working groups to stimulate a more free-flowing
discussion on several key questions relating to enabling
environments for technology transfer, taking into account the
previous day's plenary discussion on the draft technical paper and
case studies. Both working groups included participants from
developing and developed countries and addressed identical set of
questions. Working Group I (WG-I) was chaired by Holger Liptow
(Germany) with Susanne Haefeli (World Business Council for
Sustainable Development) as Rapporteur. Working Group II (WG-II) was
chaired by Kishan Kumarsingh (Trinidad and Tobago), with Richard
Bradley (US) as Rapporteur. Participants' discussions in the working
groups were reported to the plenary and are to provide inputs and
contribute to the final report of the workshop. The questions raised
in the two working groups, and participants responses, are set out
in the section below.
What are the key elements for creating enabling
environments conducive to transfer of ESTs, keeping in mind the
various dimensions possible? Participants in WG-I made the
following points: governments have an important role to play in
creating enabling environments for the transfer of ESTs; policy
actions can be taken at macro, meso and micro levels; technology
transfer should be integrated into overall national development
frameworks, as well as broader environmental, economic, social and
health policies; technology transfer efforts should be directed at
adaptation as well as mitigation; both national and international
standards can enhance flows of technology transfer; and risk
reduction and management are important in creating enabling
environments.
Delegates in WG-II identified a number of key
elements, including the importance of: comprehensive awareness and
involvement among stakeholders; appropriate means for resolving
stakeholders' conflicting interests; links between sustained
capacity building and academic institutions; clear definitions of
public and private interests; and the incorporation of sustainable
development goals in policies and programmes.
What could governments do to identify the
barriers to technology transfer and the means to overcome these
barriers? WG-I recommended a number of policy actions to support
enabling environments for technology transfer, including:
needs assessments;
evaluation of existing policies that influence
the enabling environment;
intra-governmental coordination;
protection of intellectual property rights and
legal contracts;
political support for programmes and
institutions that support technology transfer;
seed investment programmes to stimulate private
sector investment; and
capacity building for major stakeholders.
Participants also discussed a proposal to place
government actions to identify and address barriers to technology
transfer in a four-element framework focusing on clarity,
consistency, transparency and dissemination.
In WG-II, participants pointed out the need for, inter alia:
greater communication and interaction between
key ministries;
delineation of the roles of the private and
public sectors in both developed and developing countries;
economic incentives targeting industries that
are not currently participating in international trade; and
ensuring that technology transfer initiatives
are compatible with national sustainable development agendas.
What role could other stakeholders – such as
multilateral lending institutions, bilateral programmes, NGOs, and
 the private sector – play in creating an enabling environment for
technology transfer? WG-I participants responded to this
question by highlighting, inter alia, the engagement of
multilateral and bilateral implementing agencies, such as the GEF
and regional institutions in creating enabling environments for
technology transfer; and building the capacity of regional experts
to support technology transfer to least developed countries (LDCs).
WG-II stressed the need to identify different
roles for each stakeholder, foster awareness among donor agencies of
the environmental impacts of their projects, increase dialogue
between ministries and donor organizations, and promote cooperation
between NGOs and other stakeholders.
What role could international organizations such
as the World Trade Organization (WTO) and multilateral environment
agreements (MEAs) play in promoting enabling environments for
technology transfer? How could lessons learned from other MEAs be
used in creating enabling environments for technology transfer?
Participants in WG-I responded to these questions by underscoring
the overlap between technology transfer efforts under the UNFCCC and
other MEAs and recommending increased communication among technology
transfer bodies across various MEAs. They also suggested further
investigating the linkages between WTO rules on trade regimes and
technology transfer under the UNFCCC.
WG-II suggested, inter alia:
increasing cooperation between the secretariats
of MEAs to identify synergies and avoid overlaps and duplication
of effort;
minimizing potential conflict between
international agreements, including the WTO and UNFCCC;
enhancing dialogue and maximizing synergies
between relevant MEAs and organizations; and
providing a forum for discussion and
international understanding of the interactions between
environment and socioeconomic issues.
Is there a common ground for the removal of
barriers for technology transfer in general, not only from an
environmental perspective, in both Annex I and non-Annex I Parties?
Participants in WG-I acknowledged that developed and developing
countries often face similar barriers to market penetration. They
suggested that some actions to cultivate an enabling environment,
particularly at the macro level, may have benefits for the transfer
of all technologies, and not just for ESTs. They also considered
ways to ensure that actions be targeted at supporting the transfer
of ESTs.
WG-II identified poverty alleviation as a common
ground for the removal of barriers for technology transfer within
the context of sustainable development.
What could the next steps be to address the issue
of enabling environments in the context of the UNFCCC process?
In WG-I, participants advocated defining concrete actions as a
follow-up to the draft technical paper. Discussions in WG-II
highlighted some possible next steps, including:
a high-level segment for discussing
enabling environments at the next COP;
a workshop involving the secretariats of
various MEAs and other organizations;
recognition of successful EST projects through
awards;
the organization of fora for the private sector
to exchange experience on ESTs;
support and funding for the establishment of,
and exchange between, academic programmes in developing countries,
and the provision of scholarships for studies on climate change
and ESTs that are consistent with national technology transfer
priorities; and
the enhancement of domestic educational
programmes on climate change and ESTs.
Can you identify concrete suggestions for
improvement of the draft technical paper? Participants in WG-I
suggested including or embellishing the following elements:
analysis of trends and common elements of
technology transfer across all sectors;
examining failures and success stories, and
methods of replicating the latter;
consideration of Parties' national
communications to observe the evolution of technology transfer
under the UNFCCC; and
increased attention to technology transfer for
adaptation.
In WG-II, delegates suggested including a
glossary of terms, employing simpler language, and checking for
accuracy.
SYNERGIES AND CONSISTENCY BETWEEN UNFCCC
ACTIVITIES AND OTHER RELEVANT ORGANIZATIONS IN SUPPORTING ENABLING
ENVIRONMENTS FOR TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
On Thursday afternoon, 10 April, delegates met in
plenary to hear presentations and engage in discussions on synergies
and consistency between the UNFCCC and other organizations. The
session was chaired by SBSTA Chair Halldor Thorgeirsson (Iceland).
Mark Radka, Energy Programme Coordinator for the
Technology, Industry, and Economics Division of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), expressed the opinion that there is
generally a high-level of consistency in the work of various
agencies and organizations on technology transfer related to climate
change. However, he noted that some overlap or duplication of work
can exist, particularly on more straightforward projects – for
instance, in the publication of handbooks on the CDM by several
different organizations. Regarding enabling environments for
technology transfer, he noted the limited number of potential
partners with the necessary expertise in developing countries, and
said this needs to be addressed.
Observing that "synergy is not accidental," Radka
said technology needs assessments should identify gaps in the
enabling environment, and that relevant organizations and agencies
should help fill these gaps. He suggested that the UNFCCC
Secretariat could help coordinate efforts to fill such gaps. He also
highlighted the importance of information sharing and awareness
raising. Drawing attention to the proposal made earlier in the
meeting for a workshop looking at enabling environments in the
context of other MEAs, he noted UNEP's expertise in this area, and
its willingness to be involved in organizing such a meeting.
Peter Pembleton, UNIDO, noted the need to develop
synergies with various MEAs and pointed out that each agency has
different mandates and deals with different stakeholders. He
underscored that there is scope for fostering synergies among
secretariats and suggested that synergies could be developed within
each country.
Recognizing that technology plays a key role in
the sustainable growth of developing countries and EITs, Elmer Holt,
CTI, highlighted the essential role of the private sector in the
long-term transfer of technology. He highlighted CTI's collaboration
with the GEF, UNDP, UNFCCC and UNEP on issues relating to
country-driven technology needs assessment and essential measures to
foster the engagement of business and financial communities in
technology transfer. Holt underscored a variety of benefits of
collaborating with other MEAs, including: leveraging limited
financial and human resources on issues of common interest;
integrating and strengthening regional and country level activities
through information-sharing and joint activities; and providing a
platform for multilateral approaches and consistency in technology
transfer.
Florin Vladu, UNFCCC Secretariat, reported on the
information on enabling environments provided under the TT:CLEAR
website, which includes case studies from various countries and
international organizations, website addresses and links, and papers
on innovative capacities. He noted possible additional information
that the TT:CLEAR could provide for fostering enabling environments,
including additional information on certification, equity
consideration, social impacts and training, and links to other
clearinghouses. Janos Pasztor, UNFCCC Secretariat, highlighted that
governments have an important role to play in enabling environments
for technology transfer and described some UNFCCC activities in
organizing workshops and establishing the TT:CLEAR. He noted that
the ten dimensions of enabling environments identified by the IPCC
could provide a useful basis for each participant to identify the
means to contribute in creating enabling environments for technology
transfer. He also highlighted the need to ensure coherence both
within and outside the UNFCCC.
DISCUSSION: Highlighting the need for
synergies beyond the UN system, a participant from a developing
country expressed concern at the lack of involvement of the Bretton
Woods institutions in these discussions, especially given their
impact on policy making in developing and least developed countries.
In response, Wanna Tanunchaiwatana said representatives from the
World Bank and other organizations had been invited but were unable
to attend, although the GEF had sent some information to the UNFCCC
Secretariat prior to the meeting. Elmer Holt noted that the Bretton
Woods institutions had contributed to the consultative process, and
said he detected a growing environmental focus within those
institutions. Janos Pasztor said mainstreaming environment issues in
such institutions is happening gradually, although he would prefer
to see it occur more rapidly. He believed the WSSD and CSD processes
could assist in this mainstreaming exercise. Mark Radka noted the
funding limitations placed on the GEF, and suggested that the SBSTA
– through the EGTT – could recommend to the GEF possible priority
areas in terms of technology transfer and enabling environments. He
supported directing this funding towards education, training and
strengthening relevant institutions. One developed country speaker
noted that it is rare for governments to direct one
intergovernmental body to tell another intergovernmental body what
to do, and drew attention to governance issues. However, he also
observed that information sharing with such institutions was fairly
common. Janos Pasztor noted that the UNFCCC is required to give
guidance to the GEF on funding priorities in relation to climate
change.
Another developed country participant highlighted
the value of translating documents into multiple languages.
Responding to this comment, Mark Radka noted that, while this could
be carried out formally through the UN system, it is often more
efficient and cost effective for individual countries and
organizations to take the lead.
Reflecting on these discussions, Chair
Thorgeirsson said the climate change process is moving towards the
mainstream and placing the issue in a broader context, with the
effect of enhancing enabling environments.
CLOSING SESSION
Participants heard closing statements on Thursday
afternoon. EGTT Chair William Agyemang-Bonsu thanked the UNFCCC
staff for all their efforts and all participants for their
attendance, especially COP-8 President T.R. Baalu. He also expressed
his appreciation to the Government of Belgium and other countries
for sponsoring this workshop, and thanked the Earth Negotiations
Bulletin for its accurate, detailed reporting on climate change
meetings.
Wanna Tanunchaiwatana, UNFCCC Secretariat,
congratulated all EGTT members, Chairs and Rapporteurs, Ghent
University and local staff, the UNFCCC technology team, and
colleagues from UN agencies for their support in this workshop.
Chair Agyemang-Bonsu closed the meeting at 5:18 pm.
THINGS TO LOOK FOR BEFORE COP-9
14TH ANNUAL EARTH TECHNOLOGIES FORUM (ETF): This
meeting will be held from 22-24 April 2003, in Washington DC, United
States. For more information, contact: ETF; tel: +1-703-807-4052;
fax: +1-703-528-1734; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://www.earthforum.com
INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON RESTRUCTURING THE
ENERGY SECTOR IN TRANSITION COUNTRIES: This event will be held
from 28-30 April 2003, in Leipzig, Germany, and is organized by
Verbundnetz Gas AG, Stadtwerke Leipzig and the World Bank. For more
information, contact: Pauline Massart; tel: +49-341-1492-393; fax:
+49-341-91-37-669; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://www.restc.com
19TH LATIN AMERICAN CONFERENCE OF RURAL
ELECTRIFICATION (CLER): This meeting will be held from 5-10 May
2003, in Havana, Cuba. For more information, contact the organizers
at: tel: +537-202-7096; fax: 537-202-9372; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://www.geprop.cu/cler/cler.htm
EUROPEAN REGIONAL WORKSHOP ON THE NEW DELHI WORK
PROGRAMME ON UNFCCC ARTICLE 6: This workshop will be held from
6-8 May 2003, in Le Grand Hornu, Belgium. For more information,
contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax:
+49-228-815-1999; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://unfccc.int/sessions/workshop/060503/index.html
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENERGY AND THE
ENVIRONMENT (ICEE):  This event is being organized by the
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology and George
Washington University and will be held from 22-24 May 2003, in
Shanghai, China. For more information, contact: Daoping Liu; tel:
+86-21-6568-9564; fax: +86-21-6568-0843; e-mail: [email protected] ;
Internet: http://www.gwu.edu/%7Eeem/ICEE/firstpagenew.htm
UNFCCC EXPERT GROUP ON TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (EGTT):
The third meeting of the EGTT will be held from 30-31 May 2003,
in Bonn, Germany. For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat;
tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: [email protected] ;
Internet: http://www.unfccc.int
18TH SESSIONS OF THE UNFCCC SUBSIDIARY
BODIES (SB-18): The Subsidiary Body for Implementation and the
Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice will meet
from 4-13 June 2003, in Bonn, Germany. For more information,
contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel: +49-228-815-1000; fax:
+49-228-815-1999; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://unfccc.int/sessions/sb18/index.html
INTERNATIONAL SOLAR ENERGY SOCIETY (ISES) SOLAR
WORLD CONGRESS 2003: This congress will be held from 14-19 June
2003, in Götenborg, Sweden. For more information, contact: ISES; tel:
+46-31-81-8220; fax: +46-31-81-8225; e-mail: [email protected] ;
Internet: http://www.congrex.com/ISES2003/
THE THIRD WORLD CONFERENCE ON CLIMATE CHANGE: This
conference will be held from 29 September-3 October 2003, in Moscow,
Russian Federation. For more information, contact: Conference
Secretariat; tel: +95-252-0708; fax: +95-252-0708; e-mail: [email protected] ; Internet: http://www.meteo.ru/wccc2003/econc.htm
UNFCCC COP-9: The ninth Conference of the
Parties to the UNFCCC will be held from 1-12 December 2003, in
Milan, Italy. For more information, contact: UNFCCC Secretariat; tel:
+49-228-815-1000; fax: +49-228-815-1999; e-mail: [email protected] ;
Internet: http://www.unfccc.int/
This issue of the Earth Negotiations
Bulletin © < [email protected] > is written
and edited by Karen Alvarenga < [email protected] >,
Duncan Marsh < [email protected] >, and
Chris Spence < [email protected] >. The
Editor is Pamela S. Chasek, Ph.D. < [email protected] >
and the Director of IISD Reporting Services is Langston James "Kimo" Goree
VI < [email protected] >. The Sustaining
Donors of the Bulletin are The Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the Government of Canada (through CIDA), the Swiss Agency for Environment,
Forests and Landscape (SAEFL), the United Kingdom (through the Department
for International Development - DFID), the European Commission (DG-ENV),
the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Government of Germany
(through German Federal Ministry of Environment - BMU, and the German
Federal Ministry of Development Cooperation - BMZ). General Support for
the Bulletin during 2003 is provided by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Environment of
Finland, the Government of Australia, the Ministry of Environment and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Sweden, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Trade of New Zealand, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Environment of
Norway, Swan International, the Japanese Ministry of Environment (through
the Institute for Global Environmental Strategies - IGES), the Japanese
Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (through the Global Industrial and
Social Progress Research Institute - GISPRI), and the Ministry for
Environment of Iceland. The opinions expressed in the Earth
Negotiations Bulletin are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of IISD or other donors. Excerpts from the Earth
Negotiations Bulletin may be used in non-commercial publications with
appropriate academic citation. For information on the Bulletin,
including requests to provide reporting services, contact the Director of
IISD Reporting Services at < [email protected] >,
+1-212-644-0217 or 212 East 47th St.#21F, New York, NY 10017, USA.
This page was uploaded on
04.11.2003
