Search the site
AWG WORKSHOP
The AWG convened an in-session workshop chaired by AWG Vice Chair Luiz Alberto Figueiredo Machado.
SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR FURTHER ANNEX I COMMITMENTS: On the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations, Bert Metz, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), reviewed scenarios set out in the Panel’s Third Assessment Report. He said the forthcoming Fourth Assessment Report will deal with climate sensitivity, stabilization calculations for all greenhouse gases, new mitigation options, and stabilization targets below those set out in the Third Assessment Report.
Artur Runge-Metzger, European Commission, described the EU’s agreed policy of aiming to limit global temperature rise to 2°C Celsius, based on a stabilization of concentrations at 450ppm. He said this would mean emissions reductions of between 60-80% by 2050 for industrialized countries, assuming US participation.
Harald Dovland, Environment Ministry of Norway, noted that Norway also had a long-term “aspirational goal” of 2°C. On future policies, he highlighted recommendations from the Norwegian Commission on Low Emissions, and a focus on renewable energy, pioneering and developing carbon dioxide capture and storage, and awareness raising campaigns.
Mutsuyoshi Nishimura, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, emphasized the UNFCCC objective of stabilizing emissions. He said the next commitment period should achieve stabilization through an effective framework that adds new tools and strategies to the “Kyoto toolbox.” He urged “fairness and equity on burden sharing” among countries if the process is not to collapse. SAUDI ARABIA said many Annex I countries had not shown leadership. Nishimura replied that Japan is “deadly serious” about climate change.
José Domingos Gonzalez Miguez, Brazil’s Ministry of Science and Technology, presented the Brazilian proposal emphasizing historical responsibility and shifting the focus from emissions to temperature increase. FINLAND suggested the AWG look into differentiation methodologies and not just historical responsibility, while CANADA said such responsibility is “nuanced.” AWG Chair Zammit Cutajar wondered if current discussions on further emissions reductions by Annex I countries should consider this broader historical approach.
ANNEX I PARTIES’ EMISSION TRENDS AND MITIGATION POTENTIAL: Sergey Kononov, UNFCCC Secretariat, noted increasing emissions for Annex I parties, highlighted the relevance of LULUCF for some parties’ emissions profiles, and underscored the high growth rate for emissions in transport.
Alf Wills, Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, South Africa, underlined the significance of using cumulative emissions data as the basis for an equitable approach to determining future commitments and providing space for developing countries to achieve their sustainable development goals. NORWAY observed that emissions reduction targets for developing countries were not discussed during the workshop.
Adrian Macey and Hayden Montgomery, New Zealand, presented on mitigation of methane and nitrous oxide emissions from agriculture, noting that mitigation options are limited and calling for increased international research efforts.
Mutsuyoshi Nishimura highlighted Japan’s energy efficiency and decoupling of emissions from growth in GDP. He emphasized the importance of policies and measures other than the market to drive technological innovation.
Artur Runge-Metzger underlined that offsetting emissions through the CDM cannot solve the climate problem. He pointed to the limited global emissions stabilization impact if all Annex I parties were to achieve all their reductions through domestic action, given the proposed 2°C target for temperature rise.
During the subsequent discussion, TUVALU noted the need to include all major emitters and sectors, and consider the cost of adaptation. SOUTH AFRICA said the question of equity needs to be addressed at a fundamental level. NEW ZEALAND underscored the theme of equity, questioned assumptions about curbing the growth in emissions, and highlighted the sectoral approach.
SBSTA
INDONESIA and the GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT CENTRE pointed to the role of peatlands in the carbon cycle, and NEPAL stressed community forestry. Hernan Carlino (Argentina) and Audun Rosland (Norway) will co-chair a contact group.
PROTOCOL ARTICLE 2.3: The EU noted that Article 2.3 (adverse effects of policies and measures) was addressed under other agenda items. JAPAN proposed integrating the item with discussions on Protocol Article 3.14 (adverse effects). Saudi Arabia, for the G-77/CHINA, said they are separate issues. GHANA said the issue is not just an OPEC issue and should be considered broadly, including how policies and measures in developed countries will affect trade. Chair Kumarsingh will consult informally.
BUNKER FUELS: The International Maritime Organization (IMO) reported on its work on emissions from international shipping. He informed participants of a new amendment to the London Protocol to allow carbon sequestration in seabed geological formations. KUWAIT, with SAUDI ARABIA and opposed by the EU, JAPAN, NORWAY and others, proposed removing this agenda item. CHINA said any decision should strictly follow Protocol Article 2.2 (Annex I targets and the Montreal Protocol) and only apply to Annex I parties. IMO proposed establishing a benchmark for maritime emissions. Chair Kumarsingh will consult informally.
SBI
FINANCIAL MECHANISM OF THE CONVENTION: SCCF: The EU and SWITZERLAND stressed the need to fully operationalize the SCCF. Chair Becker referred the issue to informal consultations coordinated by Bubu Pateh Jallow (Gambia). 
Third review of the financial mechanism: The EU, US and SWITZERLAND said the GEF is performing effectively and welcomed its fourth replenishment. The Philippines, for the G-77/CHINA, expressed concerns over the GEF’s performance and its resource allocation framework (RAF). CHINA said the GEF implementing and executing agencies’ performance should be assessed, and the REPUBLIC OF KOREA suggested examining the impacts of GEF funds on emissions reductions. Bangladesh, for LDCs, urged inclusion of a vulnerability index in the RAF.
Additional guidance to the GEF: The Secretariat briefed delegates (FCCC/SBSTA/2006/INF.1). CHINA supported further streamlining GEF procedures on the project cycle, enhanced country ownership of projects, and increased GEF support for adaptation and technology transfer. Tina Guthrie (Canada) and Osita Anaedu (Nigeria) will co-chair a contact group on the financial mechanism.
UNFCCC ARTICLE 6: On Article 6 (education, training and public awareness), the Secretariat presented a synthesis report on four regional workshops (FCCC/SBI/2006/17) and parties’ views on advancing work on CC:iNet – the prototype information network clearinghouse (FCCC/SBI/2006/MISC.15). UNEP reported on relevant Article 6 activities. Many parties commended these reports. SWITZERLAND advised pursuing synergies between capacity building and Article 6. Informal consultations will be conducted by Marie Jaudet (France).
CAPACITY BUILDING UNDER THE CONVENTION: The Secretariat reported on capacity building implementation, GEF’s capacity building performance indicators and monitoring (FCCC/SBI/2006/5; FCCC/SBI/2006/16; FCCC/SBI/2006/22) and on parties’ views on regular monitoring of activities (FCCC/SBI/2006/MISC.4, Corr.1 and Add.1). Tanzania, for the G-77/CHINA and supported by JAPAN, the US and EU, highlighted the importance of reaching consensus on this issue and stressed the use of existing reporting mechanisms in monitoring of capacity building. Crispin d’Auvergne (Saint Lucia) and Helmut Hojesky (Austria) will co-chair a contact group.
IN THE BREEZEWAYS
The AWG's in-session workshop appeared to generate some talk in the corridors. Discussions were widely regarded as candid, although one delegate described the workshop as a "shadow-boxing" exercise, while another commented: "There is no single vision, no single truth". However, others were more positive, noting that no consensus could possibly emerge for some time to come. "At least we're talking about these issues openly now," said one delegate. Themes for further AWG workshops are under discussion.
The Russian proposal on long-term commitments also generated discussion. Informal talks on Tuesday apparently did not lead to a breakthrough, with the current discussions being described by one observer as “more of an agenda fight.” However, early reports suggest the proposal is likely to be part of the so-called “multi-track process” on post-2012 issues for some time.  
